The Art of Fugue

The Art of Fugue
bach fugues for keyboard, 1715 – 1750

Joseph Kerman
Includes a CD with New Recordings
by Davitt Moroney and Karen Rosenak

university of california press
Berkeley Los Angeles London

University of California Press
Berkeley and Los Angeles, California
University of California Press, Ltd.
London, England
© 2005 by The Regents of the University of California
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Kerman, Joseph, 1924–
The art of fugue : Bach fugues for keyboard, 1715–1750 / Joseph Kerman.
p.
cm.
Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index.
Includes compact disc.
isbn 0-520-24358-7 (cloth : alk. paper)
1. Fugue. 2. Bach, Johann Sebastian, 1685–1750. Keyboard music. I. Title.
mt59.k49 2005
786'.1872'092—dc22
2005004045
Recording engineer for the CD: Robert Schumaker. Tracks 1–2 and 7–8 were recorded
at International House, University of California, Berkeley, on February 8, 2004; track 3
at the same location on February 23, 2004; track 4 at Chapel of St. Joseph of Arimathea,
Berkeley, on April 28, 2004; and tracks 5–6 at Hertz Hall, University of California,
Berkeley, on January 24, 2004. Tracks 16 and 17 are from Die Kunst der Fuge, BWV
1080, ed. Davitt Moroney (Munich: G. Henle Verlag, 1989), reproduced by permission
of G. Henle Verlag.
Manufactured in the United States of America
14 13 12 11 10 09 08 07 06 05
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of ANSI / NISO
Z39.48–1992 (R 1997) (Permanence of Paper).

To
Ellen Rosand,
thirty-year friend

A song that is well and artiﬁcially made cannot be well perceived nor understood at the ﬁrst hearing, but the oftener you
shall hear it, the better cause of liking you will discover.
William Byrd
What I can offer has a meaning only for those who have heard,
and who keep on hearing. To such I may be able to give a suggestion here and there for renewed hearing.
Søren Kierkegaard

Contents

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

Contents of the CD
Preface
Acknowledgments

xi
xv
xxi

Fugue in C Major: The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 1
Fugue in C Minor: The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 1
Fughetta in C Major, BWV 952
Fugue in C-sharp Minor: The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 1
Contrapunctus 1: The Art of Fugue
Contrapunctus 10: The Art of Fugue
Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue, BWV 903
Prelude and Fugue in E-ﬂat Major:
The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 1
Fugue in E Major: The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 2
Fugue on “Jesus Christus unser Heiland”: Clavierübung,
book 3
Fugue in F-sharp Minor: The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 1
Gigue: English Suite no. 3 in G Minor
Fugue in A-ﬂat Major: The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 1
Fugue in A Minor: Fantasy and Fugue in A Minor,
BWV 904
Fugue in B-ﬂat Major: The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 2
Fugue in B Major: The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 2

1
11
17
23
33
39
51
65
75
85
95
103
109
115
125
133

Afterword
Notes
Notes to the CD
Glossary
Bibliography
Index

143
149
155
159
167
171

Contents of the CD
Recording information is given on the copyright page.
Details about the instruments and musical sources
may be found on page 157.

RECORDINGS (TRACKS
1

–2

3

4

1

–8

)

Prelude and Fugue in C Major:
The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 1
Karen Rosenak, piano

1:27 / 1:52

Fughetta in C Major, BWV 952
Davitt Moroney, clavichord

1:54

Fugue on “Jesus Christus unser Heiland”:
Clavierübung, book 3
Davitt Moroney, organ

4:52

5

–6

Fantasy and Fugue in A Minor, BWV 904
Davitt Moroney, harpsichord
2:46 / 5:34

7

–8

Prelude and Fugue in B Major:
The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 2
Karen Rosenak, piano

1:43 / 3:28

SCORES (TRACKS
9

– 10

9

– 35 )

Prelude and Fugue in C Major:
The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 1
a4

11

– 12

Prelude and Fugue in C Minor:
The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 1

12–EXAMPLT1

a3

Fughetta in C Major, BWV 952

13

EXAMPLT13

a3

14

– 15

Prelude and Fugue in C-sharp Minor:
The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 1
15–EXAMPLT14

a5

16

Contrapunctus 1: The Art of Fugue

EXAMPLT16

a4

17

Contrapunctus 10: The Art of Fugue
a4

EXAMPLT17

18

– 19

Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue, BWV 903

a3

20

– 21

Prelude and Fugue in E-ﬂat Major:
The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 1
21;stave–EXAMPLT20

8va

a4

loco

a3

22

– 23

Prelude and Fugue in E Major:
The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 2

23–EXAMPLT2

a4

Fugue on “Jesus Christus unser Heiland”:
Clavierübung, book 3

24

EXAMPLT24

a4

25

– 26

Prelude and Fugue in F-sharp Minor:
The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 1
26–EXAMPLT25

a4

19–EXAMPLT18

Gigue: English Suite no. 3 in G Minor

27

EXAMPLT27

a3

28

– 29

Prelude and Fugue in A-ﬂat Major:
The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 1
29–EXAMPLT28

a4

30

– 31

Fantasy and Fugue in A Minor, BWV 904

a4

32

– 33 Prelude and Fugue in B-ﬂat Major:
The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 2
3–EXAMPLT32

a3

34

– 35

Prelude and Fugue in B Major:
The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 2

35–EXAMPLT34

a4

31–EXAMPLT30

Preface

This is a book of commentaries on selected Bach fugues—
“essays in musical analysis and appreciation,” one might call
them, to enlarge on the title of Donald Francis Tovey’s famous
Essays in Musical Analysis. The fugues are keyboard fugues, written for clavichord, harpsichord, and organ. About half of them
come from the two books of The Well-Tempered Clavier (WTC),
the other half from a variety of other sources, some of them less
familiar: Bach’s comprehensive keyboard publication Clavierübung (Keyboard Practice), Die Kunst der Fuge (The Art of
Fugue), the English Suites, and other manuscript sources. The
music stems from all periods of Bach’s career except for the earliest. The Chromatic Fantasy dates most probably from his
Weimar years, around 1715, and the two contrapuncti from The
Art of Fugue reached their deﬁnitive form when Bach revised the
work just before his death in 1750.
Annotations of any extent on Bach fugues are hard to ﬁnd
outside of the technical literature, and I have taken the time to do
xv

xvi / Preface

justice, as best I can, to these short but very rich pieces. The discussion is geared to individual segments and bars within the
fugues, so readers will need the sheet music with the bars numbered. Most of those who come to this book will already own
copies of the WTC, the source of many of the pieces, and some of
the other selections too. The CD enclosed with this book makes
it possible to view or print out all the scores, those you lack and
those you may like to have in an extra copy.
Also on the disc are performances of ﬁve of the fugues discussed below, specially recorded for this book by Davitt Moroney
and Karen Rosenak.
One inspiration for the present work was Tovey, whose lapidary
and marvelous annotations to his edition of the Well-Tempered
Clavier are classics. First published in 1924, they were reprinted
in 1994 to accompany an authoritative new musical text of the
WTC, prepared by Richard Jones. As a publication of the
Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music, Tovey’s contribution was appropriately didactic; his annotations read like a
piano teacher’s docket of instructions about touch, fingering,
ornaments, and so on, for every place that needs them. But his
instructions always rest on his understanding of the music, and
what he has to say about that makes, or should make, his commentaries required reading for anyone interested in the fugues,
not only students. My purpose is critical, not didactic. I write
about reading and listening to fugues, not performing them—
listening to them and understanding them.
Another inspiration for me was not a text but a musical
anthology, Bach: The Fugue, an elegant collection of nine fugues,
some with preludes, edited by Charles Rosen for the Oxford

Preface / xvii

Keyboard Classics in 1975. We have not a few items in common.
There are profound words in Rosen’s introduction:
The “pure” fugue, the meditative fugue, is basically a keyboard work for Bach. Of course the fugal texture can be
adapted to many forms: the dance, the concerto, the aria,
the chorale-prelude. But the fugue tout court . . . is almost
without exception conceived for keyboard in the early
eighteenth century. Only the performer at the keyboard
is in a position to appreciate the movement of the voices,
their blending and their separation, their interaction and
their contrasts. A fugue of Bach can be fully understood
only by the one who plays it, not only heard but felt through
the muscles and nerves. Part of the essential conception of
the fugue is the way in which voices that the ﬁngers can feel
to be individual and distinct are heard as part of an inseparable harmony. The confusion of vertical and horizontal
movement is one of the delights of fugue.

And again:
The keyboard fugue, for Bach, is essentially private. . . .
The proper instrument is what one has at home: harpsichord, clavichord, organ or piano. There are few of these
fugues that exploit the resources of any particular instrument; many would go equally well with sonorities as
different as organ and clavichord.

What I have in my home is a piano, and I expect most readers of
this book will be pianists too. The music on the CD is played on
all of these instruments.
The fugues that I have selected are, to me, also select; the commentaries attempt to convey something of what makes them
particularly beautiful, powerful, intriguing, witty, or moving.

xviii / Preface

This can only be done, I believe, by following the music closely,
seeing, hearing, and Rosen would say feeling how the melodic
lines are shaped and combined, how the harmonies unfold, and
how time spans are articulated. My hope is to reach the broadest
range of musicians: not only performing artists—harpsichordists
and pianists—students, and musicologists, but also amateur
players: home pianists who have often found themselves drawn
to Bach over the years, often to pieces they have known for as
long as they can remember, and whose deep pleasure in them is
not blunted too much by cautious tempos, uneven articulation, or
even a certain amount of stumbling. This community is said to
be dead or dying, but I reckon the reports are exaggerated.
The technical level of my discussions will not be high enough
for some professionals. I hope it will not seem unduly high to
amateurs. At a few points where the discussion gets detailed I
format the text in smaller type with bullets. It is not possible
to deal properly with fugue without employing technical language—a language in which anyone who has had music lessons
is already a beginning speaker. We know words for pitch and
rhythm, chord and key, if not for stretto and inversion (yet). A
glossary has been carefully compiled to explain technical concepts
and exemplify them, by means of page references in the text and
bar numbers in the scores on the CD. For intrepid readers the
glossary can serve as a self-tutor.
The commentaries are independent and can be read separately. The ﬁrst two can also be read as a pair laying out the basic
facts of fugue.
No commentary is provided on the preludes that introduce
many of the fugues discussed below, or the fantasy from the
Fantasy and Fugue in A Minor. Fugue is the topic here; the

Preface / xix

Prelude in E-ﬂat Major from the WTC, book 1, is discussed only
because it includes, exceptionally, a fugue (an exceptional fugue).
This lacuna will seem to some a dereliction, even an outrage, and
no doubt a more methodical author would have made it his business to “cover” the preludes. Or a less self-indulgent one; having
written several books about entire repertories before, this time I
only wanted to write about music that engages me wholly, and
that I feel I can write about effectively. I chose my fugues. Bach
chose the preludes.
But scores for the preludes and the A-Minor Fantasia are
available on the CD, like the fugues, so one can see them, study
them, and play them together with their fugues. Some can also
be heard on the CD (tracks 1, 5, and 7).

NOTE

Clarifying marks are used when melodic lines and progressions are
indicated by letters in the text:
directional arrows > and < for larger leaps
the stroke | for barlines
the mark ∫ for sequences

EXAMPLher

Acknowledgments

I acknowledge without irony the sympathetic if inconclusive
consideration given to earlier versions of this book by several
publishers; as the process took some time, I was able to rethink
and ﬁne-tune the thing considerably. And I am of course most
appreciative to Mary Francis, Rose Vekony, and Lynne Withey
of the University of California Press for carrying publication
through so splendidly. The recordings were supported by the
O’Neill Fund at the University of California at Berkeley, and I
am both grateful and delighted that my colleagues Davitt
Moroney and Karen Rosenak agreed to make them. Robert
Schumaker was the expert and very patient recording engineer.
Michael Markham not only checked the text, ﬁlled out footnotes, and so on, but also engaged in a dialogue about it. In effect
he was another insightful reader, along with the knowing press
referees. The text owes a great deal to the comments of friends,
some of whom mulled over early draft chapters—Charles Fisk
and Davitt Moroney in particular, O. W. Neighbour, Ellen
xxi

xxii / Acknowledgments

Rosand, and the late David Lewin, a consummate, gentle
musician, composer, and profound thinker about music. Peter
Kerman is the amateur home pianist I refer to in the foreword.
I am very grateful to all of them, and also to David Ledbetter
for sending me his book on The Well-Tempered Clavier in typescript before publication, an act of courtesy from which I greatly
beneﬁted. Thanks also to Christopher Hatch for a remark in a
review some years ago which, though he can have no idea, helped
me understand my own project. The essay on the Fugue in Csharp Minor from the WTC, book 1, appeared in EighteenthCentury Music 1 (2004): 79–84.
The routine in my earlier books was to keep the formal
acknowledgments sincere, short, and simple; but as would be the
case for many veteran musicians, I am sure, sustained engagement
with the Bach fugues has taken on characteristics of a Künsterleben for this one, and the occasion seems to require something
more. My indebtedness goes all the way back to the petite Russian
lady who gave me the Fughetta in C Major and the two-part
Fughetta in C Minor, the music master whose idea of a sightreading test was the Fugue in D Minor from the Well-Tempered
Clavier, book 1 (a bear), and the girl at summer camp who practiced F-sharp Minor in book 1 between rehearsals for Too Many
Girls. At Princeton Professor Oliver Strunk explained the evolution of A-ﬂat Major in book 2 and undergraduate Charles Rosen
lectured me on G-sharp Minor. Carl Weinrich, one of America’s
ﬁrst early music mavens, introduced me to the organ toccatas.
Not many in academia can have had so many inspired Bach
players as actual colleagues, all of them inspirational to me. Even
Carl can be counted as a colleague, since brieﬂy I was his assistant
organist at Princeton; then Warren Martin at Westminster Choir

Acknowledgments / xxiii

College, Lawrence Moe at Berkeley, followed by Alan Curtis,
John Butt, Davitt Moroney, and for one semester Ralph Kirkpatrick, who inaugurated the Ernest Bloch Visiting Professorship at the University of California at Berkeley in 1962 with a
Well-Tempered marathon, not only playing the whole forty-eight
in public twice, on harpsichord and clavichord, but also giving
master classes and public lectures and even team-teaching (with
me) an undergraduate course on it.
C Minor in book 2 was a bone of contention . . . after concerts
Ralph would unwind at a steak house in Oakland, with Alan and
me in attendance, patiently nursing our beers. Much later, after
both Alan and John Butt had left Berkeley, John unknowingly
triggered the present book with a gift of his CD of the Bach
Toccatas and Fugues and the “Schübler” Chorales for Harmonia
Mundi. The excitement of rediscovering the “Dorian” Prelude
and Fugue in his performance spilled over to other fugues.
Suddenly, mysteriously, I found myself writing.
Music consoles, in a way I did not really know before spending the last couple of years with Bach, at a difﬁcult period. Du
holde Kunst, ich danke dir dafür. I thank Johann Sebastian Bach—
to me an austere, remote, but incontestably benign ﬁgure, like
others in my life: William Byrd, Oliver Strunk, and ﬁrst of all my
father, the writer William Zukerman. His support extended all
the way down to buying me a Smith-Corona when I was a boy
and then searching out venues for my teenage music criticism,
though he had no ear for music. It was my mother who loved
music, sang beautifully, and smiled when she sang.
Joseph Kerman
Berkeley, April 3, 2004

chapter 1

Fugue in C Major
The Well-Tempered Clavier, Book 1

The Well-Tempered Clavier is an exemplary collection of twice
twenty-four preludes and fugues for keyboard in which Bach
exhibits his unsurpassed contrapuntal virtuosity and also the seemingly inﬁnite types, forms, and characters that may emerge—at his
hands, and at his hands alone—from the art of fugue.
Some pieces are sketches for jeweled miniatures, some for
vast frescos. Some are intimate and lyrical; some quiver with
the intensity of passion that is equally intensely controlled;
some fringe on the pedantic; and some are frankly sublime.
Part of their fascination resides in the many possible attitudes
from which they can be viewed, and in the manifold aspects
they can assume. What seemed schematic may reveal new
freshness; what seemed dull emerges as merely misunderstood; what seemed limited displays new dimensions; to
what by its very richness and concentration has become
indigestible, we return after days, months, or even years, to
receive new and unanticipated nourishment and revelation.
One may occasionally lay aside the WTC, but never because
of its exhaustibility.
1

2 / Fugue in C Major

These are words by Ralph Kirkpatrick, the leading harpsichordist, after Landowska, of the mid-twentieth century, who
recorded the WTC twice and wrote a book about it. Few musicians have engaged with this music more deeply.
A particularly exemplary function is usually adduced for the
pair of concise fugues at the head of book 1 of the WTC. The
Fugue in C Major, preceded by a famous and also exemplary
prelude, displays maximum learning: a stretto fugue ﬁtting two
dozen entries of a one-and-a-half-bar subject into little more
than two dozen bars of music. Strettos come at many different
time and pitch intervals.
The importance that Bach attached to stretto is evident from
The Art of Fugue, another exemplary work, which requires a
whole series of stretto fugues to exemplify this most widely used
of the so-called fugal devices. Stretto is formed when one voice
carrying the fugue subject is “answered” by the subject in
another voice before the ﬁrst voice has ﬁnished. It heightens the
subject in a complicated way—or, rather, in one of many complicated ways; the effect can be peremptory, intense, majestic, or
serene. The Fugue in C Major uses an array of strettos to build
intensity, to unsettle a fundamental rhythmic pattern, to generate modulations, and to prepare a registral climax. Another
stretto brings the composition to rest.
Not even the stretto fugues of The Art of Fugue are as singleminded as the Fugue in C Major, whose twenty-seven bars
include no episodes and, apart from subject entries, no more
than a total of two bars of transitional music preparing the
fugue’s three cadences . . . plus a miniature peroration in which
the whole thing gently goes up in smoke, up to a high C we have

Fugue in C Major / 3

never heard before. The three cadences—structural cadences—
terminate and deﬁne the fugue’s large sections, or phases, as it
sometimes seems better to call them. The word “section” suggests
something carved out in space, as with a pizza, and while “phase”
is not a term usually employed by music theorists for a unit of
time, the dictionary deﬁnition is suggestive: “a stage in a process
of change or development.”
To work many different strettos on a relatively long subject,
such as this one, must also be considered an achievement.
Fourteen notes is long for a subject designed for multiple strettos. The typical stretto-fugue subject runs to about half that
length (six notes in the Fugue in E Major from the WTC, book
2, for example: see page 75).
The number fourteen carried special resonance for this composer, being the total of numbers derived from his name: 2 (B) +
1 (A) + 3 (C) + 8 (H). He chose a number to sign the beginning
of the WTC, just as later he would personalize the end of The Art
of Fugue with a theme: B∫ (in German terminology, B) A C Bπ
(H). He also chose to open his exemplary collection of twentyfour preludes and fugues with a fugue that brings its subject
twenty-four times.
Then the next fugue in the collection has no strettos or other
artiﬁce at all, beyond contrapuntal inversion at the octave. The
Fugue in C Minor is a very knowing fugue but it is not a learned
fugue; it ﬂaunts minimal learning. As Hermann Keller writes in
his book on the WTC, it “owes its extraordinary popularity with
players as much to the charm of its subject as to its easy comprehensibility and transparent polyphony. . . . This fugue is in everything the complete antithesis of the ﬁrst one”—as we will hope
to see on pages 11–15.

4 / Fugue in C Major

First Phase: Bars 1–13
In spite of the technical prowess that one might suppose this fugue
was meant to demonstrate, as the ﬂagship fugue of The WellTempered Clavier, more than one commentator has exclaimed
over its natural, spontaneous quality and quiet eloquence. Certainly
the piece wears its learning lightly. What it really demonstrates
is that learning and eloquence are not mutually exclusive: a fundamental lesson. Bach, “the deepest savant of contrapuntal arts
(and even artiﬁce), knew how to subordinate art to beauty,” a
leading literary journal declared in 1788. (The anonymous writer
was almost certainly Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach.)
Fugues start up slowly and methodically. After one voice
alone announces the fugue subject in the opening exposition—
here it is the alto voice—the others enter one after another,
enriching the texture from a single melodic line to two-part
polyphony, three-part polyphony, and so on. Bach omits the short
links usually found between some of the later voice-entries of an
exposition (“merely interstitial episodes,” Tovey calls them), serving notice that this is to be a very compressed fugue. Since the
subject extends over a bar and a half, its four appearances establish a deﬁnite hypermeter of three half notes’ duration.
Donald Tovey, though now a distant ﬁgure, will be cited again
and again in this book. Though the center of his universe was
Beethoven, as I have written elsewhere, Tovey did some of his
most penetrating scholarly-critical work in reference to Bach.
The continuation of the original subject in a fugue, called the
countersubject, probably deserves that name only when it is
maintained as a functional feature later in the composition, along

Fugue in C Major / 5

with the subject. The ﬂuent continuation material here does not
quite reach that status; yet it plays an elegant role in the fugue’s
exposition and conclusion. The sixteenth-note sequential ﬁgure
of bars 2–3 (A G F E ∫ F E D C ∫ D C B | A) emerges from the
subject’s opening ﬁgure as a diminution and is itself treated to
melodic inversion. Basic tools of Bach’s workshop, sequence,
diminution, and inversion can be applied almost unobtrusively,
as here, but also more pointedly for a variety of expressive effects.
The Fugue in C Major, a four-voiced fugue, brings the subject
successively in the alto, soprano, tenor, and bass and then goes on
at once to a ﬁfth entry in the soprano with a close stretto entry on
its heels (saturation!). This stretto is a strict canon in the tenor at
the time interval of a quarter note and the pitch interval of an
upper ﬁfth; in one contrapuntal inversion or another—that is,
with the second voice entering above or below the ﬁrst, in any
octave—this is the main stretto that Bach will make use of
throughout the piece. The ﬁfth entry itself conﬁrms the macrometrical pulse of three half notes, and if the stretto (the sixth
entry) breaches it, the break seems calculated to allow the next
entries to march all the more strongly in the modular slow triple
meter. They modulate ﬁrst to G and then to A minor.
The key of A minor, the submediant, is afﬁrmed by the fugue’s
ﬁrst strong cadence—though as often happens with structural
articulations in Baroque music, the music starts up again at once
in the tonic key C major without any modulatory process. Bach
prepares this cadence as brieﬂy as possible, or just about. It is interesting that he also wanted to make it as expressive as possible, as
though to counteract the rather dry, abstract nature of the basic
material. He did the same with the next cadence (in D minor).

6 / Fugue in C Major

Second Phase: Bars 14–19
In this small stretch of music much happens. Starting in C major
with the “default” stretto we already know—it therefore sounds
as though we are starting all over again—Bach lays down a barrage of further stretto entries at different time intervals and different scale degrees. Several entries are reinforced by doubling in
thirds [bars 15, 17, 19].
This classic pileup is one of the passages Laurence Dreyfus
has in mind when he refers delicately in his book Bach and the
Patterns of Invention to the “irritations” in Bach’s voice leading—awkward sounds in certain of the canonic dispositions
“that he attempted to eliminate, perhaps without achieving an
unqualiﬁed success.” But these attempts, by adding ingenious
covering counterpoint in the noncanonic voices, contribute to
some of the most expressive moments in the fugue, as Dreyfus
points out.
He cites bars 17–19. The A-minor cadence in bar 14 had
activated a run of subject entries all starting from the pitches C
and G in one octave or another, but now they are topped by
a tenor entry starting from A [bars 17–18]. The melodic line
moves up to D and then to F, the tenor’s highest note in the
fugue so far. The upper voices also rise to the top of their ranges
around now; the soprano, as usual, is the voice to watch, for the
curling eighth-note scale that it traces invests the registral climax with special power and radiance. This scale merges two
entries, one incomplete and the other complete [bars 15–17],
advancing from G above middle C up to the higher C and then
to high F, A, and ultimately B∫, just one note short of the top of
Bach’s keyboard.

Fugue in C Major / 7
Example 1

15

The harmony tilts expansively to the subdominant, as the texture opens up in bars 16–17—where I always hear a spectral ﬁfth
voice, according to the model in example 1. (It is not uncommon
for Bach to divide a fugue subject, clearly heard, between two
voices.) What I am hearing is the dazzling eruption of high
trumpets and drums in the Gratias of the B-Minor Mass, a fugue
with evident points of contact with the present WTC fugue.
[Example1]

Third Phase: Bars 19–27
The climactic high B∫ in the soprano echoes a moment later in a
bass entry pointed toward the next cadential goal, D minor [bar
18]. D minor balances the previous minor key, A minor. (The
large-scale tonal progression from here to the end of the fugue,
the circle of ﬁfths A–D–G–C, will be articulated by pedals in the
bass.) But a “default” stretto at the upper ﬁfth overlaps the actual
cadence and casts a strange ﬁltered light over it. A novel effect,
this seems to arise from a compound of the unexpected D-major
harmony—with F∏—the pause on the pedal D, brief as it is, and
the way the two inner voices ease their way or glide across the
cadential downbeat. Bπ also rather pointedly contradicts the climactic B∫s heard earlier [bar 19].

8 / Fugue in C Major

The progression conveys something of the mood of an interrupted, or deceptive, cadence, though technically it cannot be
called that, of course, and to call the D-major chord a tierce de
Picardie also seems odd, for Picardy mode-change is supposed to
happen to the tonic chord at the end of a composition, not to the
dominant of the dominant somewhere in the middle. At key
points earlier in the fugue—after the exposition, and after the
A-minor cadence—the function of the default stretto was to
move the music forward. By this time it feels valedictory, almost
nostalgic.
It initiates a beautifully calculated slowdown. After the stately
momentum of the ﬁrst phase of this fugue, and the whirl of virtuosic exertion in the second, the concluding phase brings a
peaceful stretto that feels like a duplication, stretto without sforzo,
without stress [bars 20–24]. This stretto is drawn out at the lower
sixth over a pedal G.
One more, final stretto comes above the third and longest
pedal, a prolongation of the cadential note C [bars 24–27]. Tinges
of subdominant harmony relax the music further—how precisely the B∫s are positioned in bars 24–26—and relaxation also
extends to the form of the subject. As a general rule, the statement of the subject that comes at or near the end of a fugue
makes a definitive statement, sometimes aphoristic or witty,
sometimes climactic or monumental. Not here. What we get
here is a very informal and mild free entry in the soprano, which
skips a few beats while restoring (with some help from the alto)
its long-forgotten continuation, that sequential figure in sixteenth notes (A G F E ∫ F E D C). With which the soprano
guides the melodic line back down to its opening note, the tonic,
C [bars 24–26].

Fugue in C Major / 9

The music is coming to a close—heretofore the subject has
ended less conclusively, on the third degree, not the tonic—and
on C the subject converges with C in the pedal, two octaves
below. Still, this turns out to be rather fragile as a place of rest,
and the wispy upward scales at the end do not contribute much
to stability. Perhaps they are Bach’s way of nudging us to move
right along to the next number, the antithetical Prelude and
Fugue in C Minor.

chapter 2

Fugue in C Minor
The Well-Tempered Clavier, Book 1

Bach’s very best-known fugue must be the Fugue in C Minor
from book 1 of The Well-Tempered Clavier. It has become standard teaching material in advanced and elementary textbooks
alike, for courses in canon and fugue as well as lowly Music
Appreciation. It was the ﬁrst fugue to be jazzed and the ﬁrst to
be switched on. Heinrich Schenker, lord and master of modern
music theory, settled on it as the example to expound in a classic
essay, “Organicism in Fugue,” which recently provoked an entire
critical chapter from Laurence Dreyfus in his book Bach and the
Patterns of Invention. When The New Grove Dictionary of Music
and Musicians dropped Roger Bullivant’s solid article “fugue”
from its second edition, what replaced it was (among other
things) a blow-by-blow analysis of the Fugue in C Minor.
There is a manuscript copied by one of Bach’s students containing analytical annotations to this work. (Some are given by
David Schulenberg in The Keyboard Music of J. S. Bach.) “For the
use and improvement of musical youth eager to learn,” reads
11

12 / Fugue in C Minor

the title page for the WTC; did the Fugue in C Minor occupy a
special place in the composer’s personal curriculum?
One can even detect a mild backlash as regards the piece, as
when Bullivant reaches the chapter on fugal form in his book on
fugue and says he will look “not at the standard examples (WTC
I C-Minor is the great favorite for an introduction to Bach’s technique, WTC I C-Major being, for good reasons, beyond the understanding of the conventional theorist!) but at some of the more
‘difﬁcult’ and, it is hoped, interesting forms.” Assuming that Bach
wanted to exhibit something minimal at (or very near) the beginning of his exemplary collection of preludes and fugues, C Minor
indeed presented itself as a prime candidate.
Bullivant does not fail to note points of interest in this less-thandifﬁcult composition, such as a “humorous fake entry” as early as
bar 6 and the hidden entry of the subject at what sounds like the
halfway mark of a sequential episode [bar 11]; compare also bar 20.
One might add to these points Bach’s astute choice of exactly
the most incisive features of the subject from which to build the
ﬁrst episode, namely the downward leap of a sixth and the syncopation near the end of the subject. This episode returns later in
another key and another contrapuntal inversion [bars 5–6, 17–
19]; a second episode also returns, in this case without inversion
[9–10, 22–23]. Recurring episodes are an attractive feature of
this fugue and similar ones in the WTC.
Astute—and I think we could also call it ideally didactic.
“Like this, like this, like this,” Bach is saying in the threefold
sequence of bars 5–6. If Bach planned this early item in the WTC
for teaching purposes, he must be suspected of the eighteenthcentury equivalent of dumbing down . . . but then or now, this is

Fugue in C Minor / 13

a process that need by no means be unsophisticated. What is
interesting is the way exaggerated simplicity coexists here with a
whole array of skillful details.
For example, bars 13–14 may seem like a heavy-handed lesson in the treatment of scales in contrary motion. Yet the bland
left-hand thirds are derived with a sort of exasperated wit from
the near-continuous thirds just previously, themselves due to a
revision in the second countersubject to make it work in the
major mode (in the ﬁrst half of bar 12, strict inversion would
require eighth notes C B∫ A∫ B∫ in the alto).
Those countersubjects plod—as Bach must have wanted.
And when Hermann Keller spoke of the music’s “easy comprehensibility” he may have had in mind the unusually simple
parade of two-bar phrases (subject, episode, subject, episode, and
so on) at the start and throughout the ﬁrst half of the composition. But once the later episodes become extended [bars 17–19,
22–26], the later entries sound freer and stronger. Another ﬁne
touch is the bold, energizing octave transposition of the second
countersubject in bar 21.
Keller was right: it is the subject in this fugue that everyone
ﬁnds reizend, charming, spirited, piquant, perky. Its gavotte-like
rhythm permeates the whole piece. Only the “Little” G Minor
Fugue for Organ has, for organists at least, a subject with the
same sort of charisma. It is possible to feel that a tune like this
should not be saddled with countersubjects that deﬂect attention.
And it is not.
As the commentators all remark, the Fugue in C Minor
demonstrates contrapuntal inversion very well, with ﬁve of the
six possible permutations of the subject (s), countersubject 1 (cs 1),
and countersubject 2 (cs 2) clearly on display:

14 / Fugue in C Minor
bars

1–2

soprano —

3–4

7–8

11–12

15–16

20–21

26–28

29–31

s

cs 1

s

cs 1

s

cs 2

s

alto

s

cs 1

cs 2

cs 2

s

cs 1

cs 1

—

bass

—

—

s

cs 1

cs 2

cs 2

s

(chords)

As this table illustrates, fugue gives composers a perfect way to
show how a rich contrapuntal complex of subject and one or
more countersubjects can be built up, step by step, from simple
beginnings, and then to show off the same complex in many different lights. The subject sings out in the soprano or half-hides
in the alto or supports the whole complex in the bass. The same
basic harmonies will be heard over and over again, always with
a slightly different nuance.
This fugue also teaches about the conventional closure of minormode music in the major, by altering the interval of a minor
third in its ﬁnal tonic chord into the more conclusive major third
(the so-called tierce de Picardie; here C + Eπ). Again, the lesson is
unsubtle, with the Picardy third highlighted by its position (the
top voice) and linear preparation (the scale fragment outlining a
spiky diminished fourth, A∫ G F Eπ).
It seems a little strange, in fact, that this decidedly didactic
fugue, which is nearly the shortest in the whole of the WellTempered Clavier, should reach so lofty a conclusion—the rhetorical stop, the grandiose chordal statement of the subject [bars 28,
29–31]. We may be inclined to hear these gestures as a response
to improvisational ﬂourishes at the end of the preceding Prelude
in C Minor. Or something like self-parody may be involved here,
I like to think, a wry glance at impressive organ voluntaries that

Fugue in C Minor / 15

Bach had written in earlier years, such as the Passacaglia and
Fugue in C Minor, works driven by the Baroque dialectic of
extravagance and order, fantasy and craft. Typically, in these
works, ﬂamboyant preludes prepare the ground for sober fugues
with brilliant virtuosic ﬂourishes at the end.
Coming at the front of the book, the Fugue in C Minor serves
as a model for a number of others with lively, dance-like subjects
and prominent recurring episodes, but they all close in quite a
different spirit, with an epigram derived wittily from some previous material. To be sure, these similar pieces are almost all in
the major mode. Examples in book 1 are the Fugues in E-ﬂat, E,
F-sharp, and B-ﬂat Major.
In many fugues it is necessary to change the subject slightly at its
second appearance so as to smooth over the move from one tonality, the tonic, momentarily to another, the dominant. The tonal
answer, as this is called, being a little different than the subject,
it gives the composer an extra element to work with; one could
say that in the Fugue in C Minor the fifth-leap G<C of the
answer [bar 3] adds a bit of steel to the fourth-leap C<G of the
subject and suggests a sequence with A<D in the next bar. But
this is just a detail; Bach uses the tonal answer only one more
time. The technicalities of tonal answering loom too large in the
analysis of fugues. Ebenezer Prout’s great treatise on fugue of
1891 requires two whole pages for “Answer” in the index, the
longest item by far. The art of fugue lies in a nexus of long-range
continuity and rhetoric, well past the stage of local joinery.

chapter 3

Fughetta in C Major,
BWV 952

This appears to be one of the fugues that did not make the cut for
The Well-Tempered Clavier when Bach reviewed earlier materials, in the early 1720s, as a ﬁrst step in planning his project. It is
a slight piece, no doubt, but amusing and clever—though cleverness is not the same thing as sophistication, and there is a certain impudence about it that probably would have ruled it out in
any case. Bach is certainly willing to embrace comedy as well as
the grander modes of expression, but only high comedy ﬁnds its
way into the WTC.
On the matter of sophistication: a fugue subject of any length
in uninterrupted sixteenth notes was thoroughly old-fashioned
by this time, though Bach had written many in youthful compositions. Example 2 shows the subjects of an early fugue in A
minor and another fughetta that Bach copied into the Clavierbüchlein für Wilhelm Friedemann Bach, the little study book he
began compiling for his oldest son in 1720. This fughetta is numbered 953 in the Schmieder catalog of Bach’s works (BWV 953);
17

18 / Fughetta in C Major, BWV 952
Example 2
a. Fugue in A Minor, BWV 944

b. Fughetta in C Major, BWV 953

our piece is BWV 952. The works are quite similar, and young
piano students ever since have known them both from the collections of Little Preludes and Fugues issued by various publishers. These fughetta subjects can seem like throwbacks, especially
that of BWV 953, a weaker piece all around.
Still, viewed differently, the brevity and a certain rhythmic
quirk in the subject of BWV 952 hint at a spoof of those old-fashioned straggling subjects, for those in the know. On this view, the
subject counts as the ﬁrst of an almost breathless string of witticisms or antics coming up in this little composition. The rhythmic quirk arises from a slightly irregular accent thrown by an
upbeat ﬁgure onto an even beat of the bar, beat 2 of the subject’s
ﬁrst bar, in conjunction with regular accents on the odd beats,
beat 3 of this bar and beats 1 and 3 of the next.
That upbeat ﬁgure, an ascending fourth ﬁlled in by sixteenth
notes, is the key motivic element in BWV 952 (see example 3a).
It functions in a lively passage of preparation for the strong
cadence in bar 8. It returns with new piquancy at the second
b]–[Example2

Fughetta in C Major, BWV 952 / 19
Example 3

a.

b.

c.
5
inverted
(augmented)

30
augmented

appearance of this passage at the end of the composition, as we
will see.
One can even spot the ﬁgure as early as bars 3–6, in the slow
countersubject, where it can be seen to be inverted and with its
sixteenth notes augmented to eighths (see example 3b) . . . though
with material as neutral and as impoverished as this, no one is
likely to take such thematic derivations seriously (that is, as something with serious aesthetic consequence). In fact as the music
proceeds, the eighth-note ﬁgure—a ﬁlled-in descending fourth—
is mostly replaced by a different eighth-note ﬁgure also involving a fourth, this time ascending by a leap [bars 9–11].
[Example3]

The following are points of interest in this fughetta:

.

Bars 1–5: The exposition entries follow one another after three
half notes, rather than two, giving the piece a sort of time-release
acceleration effect when 22 meter replaces the de facto 32 meter
later—as also happens in the ﬁrst fugue of the Well-Tempered
Clavier and many others. More unusual in this exposition is to
see the eighth-note countersubject, introduced at the soprano
entry, coolly divided between the two upper voices at the bass
entry, presumably for reasons of register [bars 4–5]. This may be
irregular, but it can hardly be said to weaken the composition in
any way. Later, as has just been remarked, the stepwise eighthnote figure appears less often than the figure with the leap,
which nearly develops into a new countersubject.

20 / Fughetta in C Major, BWV 952

.

.

.

.

Bars 5–8: A suspiciously glib sequence emerging from the exposition accelerates and hits the ground running for an early
cadence in the dominant. This makes a strong articulation, and
a “rhyming” passage occurs at the end of the fugue, providing the
kind of neat, decisive wrap-up that usually enlivens dances and
other pieces in binary form. Bach wrote a number of other fugues
with this sort of binary articulation—two ﬁgure in this volume:
A-ﬂat Major from book 1 of the WTC and B-ﬂat Major from
book 2—as well as fugal gigues in many of his keyboard suites.
BWV 952 is a lopsided example.
Bars 13–15: A pair of entries after the central cadence has led us
to D minor, where the fugue suddenly changes style. It is hard to
think of a move quite like this in any other Bach fugue, at least
in any short one. For just a few bars it mimics a rhapsodic keyboard improvisation, beginning over a pedal, A (introduced very
smoothly, very professionally). The motivic chatter of the subject
dies down for the ﬁrst time. The harmonic rhythm, hitherto very
regular, relaxes for a moment, to good effect.
Bars 23–26: This fughetta sets no store by consistent episodes;
after another two entries and another cadence, the style changes
again. Normal fugal writing gives way to trio texture, consisting
of two matching upper voices over a swiftly moving bass, and a
momentary dip into the style galant.
Half-plaintive, half-amused, this episode draws on motifs from
the subject only at the end of each sequence leg, answered—as a
sort of putdown, perhaps—in inversion. The naive turn to the
subdominant is another fresh touch [bar 26].
Bars 26–34: A ﬁnal array of subject entries (soprano, tenor, bass)
culminates in the rhyming phrase that suggests binary structure.
The tonic cadence in bar 34 balances the dominant cadence in bar
8. Bach modiﬁed the phrase subtly (as well as transposing it) so
as to strengthen the feeling of ﬁnality, something he also helped
by bringing back the de facto 32 meter of the fugue’s beginning in
bar 26 and keeping that meter to the end.

Fughetta in C Major, BWV 952 / 21

A charming touch comes in bars 30–31. The very last entry rattles away in the low bass register for the ﬁrst time, more like a
reproof than an answer to the tenor entry just before. The original slow ﬁgure of bars 3–6, with its descending stepwise eighth
notes, inverts (not for the ﬁrst time) to trace an ascending fourth.
Then it doubles itself in sixths for emphasis and slips directly into
the original upbeat motif—that same ascending fourth in sixteenths (see example 3c). Presto, the countersubject was an inverted augmentation after all.

chapter 4

Fugue in C-sharp Minor
The Well-Tempered Clavier, Book 1

Among the special features of Bachanalia: The Essential Listener’s
Guide to Bach’s Well-Tempered Clavier—a well-meaning effort,
though badly misconceived, in my view—are the author Eric
Lewin Altschuler’s picks for the Top Ten Fugues, the Top Ten
Subjects, the Superstar Four, and so on.
Well, among the Four Most Pithy Subjects (C-sharp Minor
and A-ﬂat Major in book 1, C-sharp Major and E Major in book
2), C-sharp Minor ranks as the Superstar—the shortest, the most
constrained, and the most obsessive. The subject consists of only
ﬁve notes, drawn from four consecutive pitches, and it holds to
the tonic intently, setting down on C∏ twice and leaning on it by
means of the slow cadential progression 2–1 (D∏–C∏). The fugue
admits only two form-defining cadences, at bars 35 and 59
(halfway through), and following the latter the subject marches
up to hammer away at C∏ as many as eight times. More than a
fair share of these entries are placed as prominently as possible,
in the soprano or the bass. Although two spectacular tonal shifts
23

24 / Fugue in C-sharp Minor

interrupt this tonic parade, the subject returns in the tonic after
each of them with renewed force.
As a trajectory for a fugue this certainly seems remarkable,
though it has not excited much comment in the literature—as
remarkable for the quality of rootedness itself as for the apparent relation between the subject of this fugue and its form.
Organic theories of music, which grew up along with the Bach
revival of the nineteenth century and took sustenance from it,
lingered long into the twentieth and probably still linger. Might
not the basic matter of a fugue project itself, as though organically, into the form of the whole? The Fugue in C-sharp Minor
would appear to say so. The tonic obsession of its ﬁrst four bars
is “composed out” over its last ﬁfty. Of the secondary pitches in
the subject, D∏ will accommodate a subject entry and E a stretto.
On another level, the subject’s aggressively dissonant interval
of a diminished fourth (B∏>E) stimulates expressive minormode harmonies throughout, sonorities enriched to the point of
luxuriance in the passages that employ all of the ﬁve voice parts.

Section 1: Bars 1–35
Section 1 of the Fugue in C-sharp Minor treats the principal subject alone, and section 2 combines it with two faster subjects or
countersubjects. Starting with the bass, the initial exposition proceeds inexorably through successively higher and higher voices,
and once the texture is ﬁlled out, new entries surge up in a second exposition, maintaining or even amplifying the grandeur of
the ﬁrst.
The ﬁrst few entries sustain a traditional-sounding countersubject and set up a three-bar hypermeter, of some importance

Fugue in C-sharp Minor / 25

later in the piece. But almost at once the process of exposition
starts to waver or transmute. The three-bar meter dissipates, as
does the countersubject, while the abbreviation of the subject’s
opening whole note into a half note as early as the third entry
eases the ﬂow and at the same time softens its character. Small
irregularities in the protocol (a relaxed stretto [bar 14], entries in
the subdominant [12, 22]) disrupt the steady order—the logic, as
one usually says—of fugal exposition.
One can imagine Bach feeling this music out at the keyboard,
improvising. He seems less interested in building from the subject at this point than in mulling over another ﬁgure, a scale ﬁgure in quarter notes salvaged from the aborted countersubject.
“Nothing more is heard of this [countersubject],” says Tovey,
“except a ﬁgure of descending crotchets which, developed by
inversion in bars 17–18, fills up most of the texture . . . after
which it gives rise to the second subject.” The mood is less cumulative than ruminative.
What Tovey is describing is a variety of Schoenberg’s “developing variation”; developing variation is superimposed on fugal
exposition here and could really be said to supplant it when
major-mode entries defang the dissonant, lowering diminished
fourth that lies at the heart of it [bars 29–35].
(One can track the developmental process bar by bar: after the
quarter-note scale ﬁgure is initially developed by means of imitation [bars 9–12, 13–16], it grows into longer and longer lines:
ﬁrst one that curls up through a sixth [17–19], then one that sails
and slips down more than an octave [24–27]. The developmental tools in bars 17–18 are sequence and inversion, in bars 25–27
diminution. From bar 17 on, the ﬁgure generally appears in an
expanded form, encompassing a fourth rather than a third.

26 / Fugue in C-sharp Minor

Finally—a tiny point, but God is in the details—the scale ﬁgure
accumulates an anterior note on a downbeat [bar 30], touching
off the longest line of all, a broken scale moving through several
voices over nearly two octaves, opening up into the sonorous
cadence [bars 30–35].)
How exquisitely the scale ﬁgure “gives rise to the second subject,” by rising still further, in a new diminution [bar 36]. But
from now on the fugue becomes less ruminative than relentless.

Section 2: Bars 35–59
The first strong (almost the very first) cadence arrives at the
mediant, E—already forecast at the end of the ﬁrst exposition—
and is undercut; still another exposition in the tonic begins when
E major is canceled and the mediant C-sharp minor returns.
This standard Baroque ploy becomes functional in this composition, for the next cadence, in the submediant G-sharp minor, is
undercut in the same way.
In this new exposition the original subject comes with another,
ﬂuid second subject above it that during the answer continues its
own steady descent undisturbed in the soprano, rather than
migrating to another voice, like a regular countersubject. The
point was evidently to generate a long descending line in the treble, for a similar one occurs in bars 82–88. Sinking movement
predominates in the later stages of this composition; the partly
chromatic descent in bars 67–73 and 99–105 stays in the ear as
one of its most impressive affective gestures.
Material is doled out gradually, the second subject entering in
bar 35, the vigorous third subject in bar 49, and a kickoff ﬁgure
(also vigorous) added to the second subject in bar 43. The new

Fugue in C-sharp Minor / 27

exposition starts at three-bar intervals, like the ﬁrst one. It tilts
heavily toward the subdominant but proceeds via another majormode entry (bar 54, with a rather startling stretto between the
alto and the soprano) to a cadence in the submediant, A major.

Bars 59–94
But now say good-bye to the major mode. Few if any traces of it
can be found in the ﬁfty-odd bars that remain to the piece, up to
the hungrily awaited, gratifyingly drawn-out tierce de Picardie at
the very end.
The cadence in A major balances the previous E-major
cadence; this key too is undercut, and the sense of starting over
again in the tonic is plainer now both because the subject stands
out in the soprano and because it ﬁnally reinstates its long-lost
opening whole note [bar 59]. It hangs on to this weighty—
indeed, as it now sounds, momentous—leadoff for the rest of the
piece, producing eight granitic subject entries. It reverts to half
notes only as an extra contribution to excitement during the
stretto of bars 94–98.
(One other reversion comes in a much-discussed subdominant entry—heard clearly enough, though divided between two
voices—at bars 85–88. The fugue’s unusual bias toward the subdominant, site of ﬁve subject entries as against three in the dominant, would have been calculated to balance the upcoming
excursion to the “double dominant.”)
After the cadence in bar 59, the startup in the tonic does not
lead to modulation along well-worn paths, to mediants and submediants, as happened after bar 35. We are brought to new and
radical keys by shock tactics. Almost directly after asserting the

28 / Fugue in C-sharp Minor

subject in C-sharp minor, the soprano comes back to repeat it,
intensiﬁed, a whole step higher, in D-sharp minor. (The minor
supertonic is of course a remote or extreme key in Bach’s system,
seldom ﬁguring as the site for a fugal entry, and when it does, the
entry is approached via a close key, not juxtaposed with the tonic,
as happens here.) As though in response to this anomaly, the
supertonic entry recoils in a downdraft of chromaticism. Implicit
in the subject from the start, chromaticism becomes explicit at the
moment of harmonic extremity.
Redress occurs in the form of a mighty rumble on the tonic at
the very bottom of Bach’s keyboard [bars 73–76]. (The low B∏ at
this place must have been the reason he chose the key of C-sharp
minor for this subject. This entry is the ﬁrst entry in the bass since
back in section 1.) Or perhaps Bach acted as agent provocateur,
promoting the tonal shock in order to rationalize his tonic obsession. For remarkably, and certainly obsessively, right after the
low bass entry two others arrive on the tonic, with all three subjects circulating through the ﬁve voices—an orgy of triple counterpoint. A fourth (!) tonic entry seems desperate to break out of
a rut—bars 92–93 feel like a heroic bid for freedom.
The impasse is broken by another tonal shock, a famous multiple stretto that starts by superimposing E minor upon C-sharp
minor. This jolts as violently, and as anomalously, as the earlier
one from C-sharp to D-sharp minor.

Bars 94–115
If thematic material (or the lack of it) is considered the main
marker of musical form, the remainder of the piece would have
to count as a third discrete section, for the second subject stops

Fugue in C-sharp Minor / 29

dead at this juncture and never comes back. Hermann Keller
imagined a “bitter battle” between the two other subjects, “in
which the ﬁrst countersubject by its nature is not equipped to
take part.” Of course the busy eighth-note ﬂow had to stop to
allow the stretto to make its effect, and to clear space for an ending in ﬁve-part polyphony.
But if this is a three-part structure, it is a highly eccentric one.
The music rushes headlong through the putative point of articulation: bar 94 lacks both the strong stop and the tonal shift of bar
35 (and bar 59), and I can only hear the activity that ﬂares up
there as an intense, concentrated digression from the parade of
tonic subject entries starting at bar 73. Tonal movement up the
circle of ﬁfths—entries on E B F∏ C∏: just the right harmonic
process to heighten excitement, like the reversion from the opening whole note to a half note in bar 95, as noted above—hastily
restores the tonic.
Stretto became a major issue in the academic fugue that was
developed in the conservatories of the nineteenth century and
that probably still haunts pedagogy today. The densest of strettos was supposed to be saved till the end of the composition,
where it would provide a weighty climax. The Fugue in Csharp Minor seems to provide an example: four appearances of
a four-bar subject are pressed into a space of seven bars at a
point not far from the end, and there are even more stretto
appearances of the third subject. The latter experiences an efﬂorescence from now on, though the ﬁrst subject, as expanded by
Bach, holds its own also.
In another respect, however, the stretto here provides no
model for the stretto maestrale. This is not a climax of weight
(such as does occur in a closer model for that device, at the end

30 / Fugue in C-sharp Minor
Example 4

105

of the one other Well-Tempered Clavier fugue in ﬁve parts: the
book 1 Fugue in B-ﬂat Minor). One could speak of a climax of
agitation in the Fugue in C-sharp Minor, but the climax of
weight comes later. The stretto is more like a momentary paroxysm in which the ﬁrst and third subjects ﬁght furiously, according to Keller, until oil is poured on the waters by seventeen gorgeous, slow-ﬂowing bars of minor-mode polyphony that bring
the fugue to rest. This is by far the fugue’s longest passage using
the full ﬁve-part texture.
Note the three-bar hypermeter, again, deﬁned by the start of
the stretto and the tonic entries at bars 97 and 100. The latter is
another entry divided between two voices. One can also construe a ninth tonic entry starting at bar 104; see example 4.
[Example4]

It is hard to get too upset with anyone passionate enough about
The Well-Tempered Clavier to write a whole book about it. One
winces, though, to find the Fugue in C-sharp Minor not in
Bachanalia’s Top Ten, or even Top Forty Fugues, but in the limbo
of Eric Altschuler’s Long, Slow, and Not My Favorite Club.
For this music has been greatly, even extravagantly admired.
Mozart arranged it (in D minor) for string quintet, with a lovely
new prelude, and it haunted Beethoven when he wrote his

Fugue in C-sharp Minor / 31

Quartet in C-sharp Minor, Opus 131 (another work with a subdominant bias). For Philipp Spitta, the ﬁrst great Bach scholar, it
was an artwork
of such vast breadth and sublimity, of such stupendous—
even overwhelming—harmonic power, that Bach himself
has created but few to equal it. It is as though we were
drifting rapidly over a wide ocean; wave rises over wave
created with foam, as far as the eye can reach, and the
brooding heavens bend solemnly over the mighty scene—
the surging forces of nature and helpless, devoted humanity.

The prelude too has been equally and rightly admired. David
Schulenberg surely speaks for the consensus when he calls the
Prelude and Fugue in C-sharp Minor “one of the great masterpieces of WTC I.”
The work might almost have been calculated to impress the
nineteenth century, when terse, pregnant motives were the order
of the day. The exceptionally short subject rather resembles the
“Muss es sein?” motif in another Beethoven string quartet, Opus
135, and it is not so far from the “Fate” motif in The Ring of the
Niebelung. Hugo Riemann described it darkly as “absorbed in
itself, moving round itself, decidedly turned away from the
world—brooding—Beethovenish.” (Probably the greatest of
nineteenth-century musicologists, Riemann published a 400-page
analysis of the WTC in 1890.) Grim enough by itself—the diminished fourth B∏–E is astonishingly potent—the subject builds up
a kind of Byronic intensity through its obsessive same-key repetitions. What Classically minded critics might frown upon as
redundant impressed the Romantics as relentless, fate-driven;
one thinks of the “Dies irae” in Liszt’s Totentanz, for instance
(actually, Bach has drawn on another timeworn melody—that

32 / Fugue in C-sharp Minor

of the well-known Advent chorale “Nun komm, der Heiden
Heiland”).
When this music is not haunted and driven it is violently disrupted, at bars 66 and 94. One does not associate dramatic gestures of this kind with Bach as a writer of fugues. They resonate
well with the Romantic spirit.
What resonated best of all, perhaps, was the combination of
factors, mentioned above, which can be heard as teleological, as
though driving purposefully toward a goal. The developing variation in section 1 is a preeminently teleological technique. Then
new thematic material is introduced step by step—the ﬂuid second subject, the vigorous third, and more. In the great combative stretto and its sequel, the latest comer bids fair to outdo the
main subject, seizing the initiative as the race approaches its goal.
The tierce de Picardie at the end magniﬁcently is that goal.
All this—and all subsumed under the ideal aegis of organic
form. The Fugue in C-sharp Minor swept Spitta over stormy
oceans. It conducted Busoni through a great cathedral:
In this fugue we seem to be borne upward, out of the crypt
of a mighty cathedral, through the broad nave and onward
to the extreme height of the vaulted dome. Midway in our
ﬂight, the unadorned gloom of the beginning is supplanted
by bright ornamentation; mounting to the close, the structure grows in austere sublimity; yet the presence of the
unifying idea is felt everywhere—the single fundamental
motif leaves its impress on every part.

chapter 5

Contrapunctus 1
The Art of Fugue

Bach prepared The Art of Fugue for publication in open score,
after having composed it on two staves, in the usual keyboardmusic format. The work is a staggering compendium of nearly
twenty fugues and canons all based on a single theme, and openscore format—with each voice on its own stave—showed off the
contrapuntal devices applied to this ur-theme as clearly as possible. Technical exploits on this scale were unmatched in his own
earlier work or that of any other composer then known (then or
ever, perhaps). Bach died in 1750, before signing off on The Art
of Fugue, and for more than two hundred years it was admired
and revered, if not always greatly loved, as his last musical testament, undertaken at the end of his life and never completed
because of illness and then death.
In the twentieth century, inevitably, his ostensibly abstract
score became a very honeypot for performers of every possible
sort. It has been recorded by string quartets, orchestras, saxophone quartets, harpsichordists, organists, pianists, and even a
33

34 / Contrapunctus 1

consort of seventeenth-century viols. But for this composer
learned display was inseparable from practical performance. He
wrote the fugues to be played on a harpsichord, and while opinions may differ as to whether that should privilege harpsichord
as their ideal performance medium, it should certainly earn them
a privileged place on every keyboard player’s music stand.
Most of the fugues differ significantly from any Bach had
composed earlier. Some are contrapuntally much more complex,
loaded with strettos, diminutions, augmentations, and inversions. Some are simpler, for in order to set off the technical
virtuosity that was the work’s raison d’être, Bach had the extraordinary idea of making its ﬁrst number a fugue without contrapuntal devices. Contrapunctus 1 has neither strettos, diminutions, and so on, nor even countersubjects or recurring episodes.
These devices will be introduced only in the succeeding contrapuncti, one by one. In Contrapunctus 1 invertible counterpoint
itself is in very short supply. This elemental fugue never modulates beyond the obligatory dominant and subdominant keys.
Of course, as many have pointed out, what Bach accomplished
here amounts to a kind of negative virtuosity, for if you set up a
fugue subject ahead of time with countersubjects and strettos
they will write the fugue for you (some of it, much of it). It is a
lot harder to write a convincing fugue without the usual aids.
Also extraordinary, and paradoxical, is Bach’s decision to open a
work like The Art of Fugue with a fugue that evokes improvisation. There is actually a written-out cadenza at the end. Paradoxical, because if one improvises a fugue with a simple subject
tailor-made for strettos—as this subject is—it is almost perverse
to eschew them. Compare the fugal Prelude in E-ﬂat Major from
The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 1 (pages 71–72).

Contrapunctus 1 / 35
Example 5
a. Contrapunctus 1

b. Contrapunctus 10

25

In any case, this most basic of fugues is necessarily also one of
Bach’s freest and must also be one of his smoothest. This quality
is related to an archaic impulse that has often been noted in his
later works. Still, the seamless style that he developed for The Art
of Fugue, starting with its ﬁrst number, does not sound much like
the seamless style of sixteenth-century “Palestrina counterpoint.”
The contrapuntal lines, consisting mostly of quarter- and eighthnote patterns, move stepwise or by the smallest leaps, and the
expectations of eighteenth-century harmony often go unfulﬁlled.
Strong cadences are shunned. While such generalities only begin
to explain the almost mesmeric ﬂuency of Bach’s late style, they
may help sensitize us to contrasts where it is abrogated, such as
at those episodes featuring larger leaps [bars 29–30, 36–40, 49–
53], and at the one really, decisively strong cadence [bar 74].
Smoothness is all in this fugue, one feels. It is less articulated or
segmented than other fugues—it is hardly segmented at all. The
exposition presents the subject and answer uneventfully at regular four-bar intervals (see example 5). No doubt the absence of
links or episodes also feels “elemental.”
b]–[Example5

36 / Contrapunctus 1

Eventually the surface does begin to rufﬂe, when in a new
exposition the bass steps in on the heels of its predecessor and
enters after three bars rather than four [bar 32]. This entry—it
can be heard as a second stab at stretto, after a previous, premature effort in bars 29–30, what is sometimes called a false
stretto—moves rather hastily from the dominant around to the
subdominant, twisting and turning the subject oddly. Then the
tenor entry, as though checked by the low As in the bass, hesitates, accumulating dissonances—sevenths, ninths, and pungent
augmented intervals [bars 41, 42, 43]. The soprano in this group
of entries emerges as a sort of ethereal climax, led into by another
false stretto. The bass drops out, allowing for heightened activity in the remaining voices, like a beating of wings [bars 48–54].
Past the exposition, then, the piece can be seen to grow
increasingly complex, though the feeling seems to me not exactly
of complexity but of complexities tested out and drifted past,
ideas considered and shelved, in a constantly changing improvisational field of a unique kind. Endlessly fertile and quite
unstoppable, Bach proceeds spontaneously, almost distractedly,
until the piece pulls itself together with one grand gesture, the
long dominant pedal in the bass from bar 63 to bar 73.
Literally, of course, the pitch A drops out at bar 66, but in the
ear it lasts all the way, so the passage has the effect of a cadenza,
an increasingly rhapsodic epilogue during which pitch rises and
tension mounts until it is too much to bear—or so we must infer;
the buildup is so smooth we had no inkling of impending crisis.
This programmatically seamless music literally breaks off, stammers, and ﬁnally sinks—truly sinks—to rest. To this aporia some
performers add improvised ornaments or ﬂourishes. These cushion the break and seem somehow to humanize the crisis.

Contrapunctus 1 / 37

. . .
An elemental fugue evoking improvisation, without contrapuntal artiﬁce—this is true, but as one gets to know it better, intriguing details of purposeful counterpoint begin to show up just
below the surface. While Bach may abjure countersubjects,
Benito Rivera has shown in a close analysis how shards of countersubject material, as it were, contribute a pervasive sameness
and tranquility to the free ﬂow (compare, for example, details at
the beginning of bars 7, 11, 15, 42, 51, and 58). There are no
recurring episodes in the ordinary sense, but the two-part canon
in the ﬁrst episode reappears later under bright new streams of
soprano melody [bars 17–22, 36–39, 67–70]. No strettos—but as
we have seen, false stretto used quietly to great effect.
As for Bach’s use of the solemn term “contrapunctus,” that
accords with his evident intention in The Art of Fugue to control
counterpoint as a universal principle, rather than simply the
genre of fugue. Made up of canons and fugues of various kinds
all based on a single theme, the work encompasses more than one
contrapuntal process. (The original title of Die Kunst der Fuge,
added to Bach’s manuscript in another hand, was Die Kunst der
Fuga, “fuga” being the archaic, and by now pedantic Latin term
for imitative counterpoint.) In fact, the project was not the swan
song it was thought to be after its publication in 1751: an early
version exists from as early as 1742–46, and whereas the ﬁnal
publication remains a torso, the early text looks complete; it is
preserved as an autograph fair copy that could have gone right to
the printer after one or two ﬁnal touches. This text, though it
received more and more touches over the years and was obviously superseded by the printed version, has its own integrity.
Had Bach died a few years earlier, The Art of Fugue would now

38 / Contrapunctus 1
Example 6

73

be admired and revered among the great masterworks of Western
music in the early version.
For the ﬁnal version, Bach expanded Contrapunctus 1 beyond
its state in the autograph. He also composed two extra fugues for
the collection and expanded others, most extensively Contrapunctus 10: see pages 39–49. Originally Contrapunctus 1 closed
four bars earlier, prior to the ﬁnal subject entry that now seals the
cadence and bathes it in a wash of fresh color [bars 74–78]. The
original ending, shown in example 6, is less celebratory, more
radical and romantic.
[Example6]

chapter 6

Contrapunctus 10
The Art of Fugue

Contrapunctus 10 from The Art of Fugue is a strange composite
work of rare beauty, with two subjects.

Section 1: Bars 1–22
The singular rhetoric of the ﬁrst subject—clipped three-note
utterances, inverted and contrasted, sinking down/springing up,
circuitous/direct, dark/light, with the springing motion retraced,
softened, and overshot by a rising scale: this fascinates and mystiﬁes. Also mysterious is the subject’s trajectory, beginning on the
seventh degree C∏, away from the tonic or dominant notes, the
positions taken up by virtually all Bach fugues, and ending—
where? Roger Bullivant remarks of this “vague” subject, “left to
its own devices the result would hardly be a true fugue.” Perhaps,
but what matters is not the truth but the multifariousness of
fugue. When we need to distinguish between the two subjects of
Contrapunctus 10 we can call this one the “enigmatic subject.”
39

40 / Contrapunctus 10

Upward scales in eighth notes, spanning the intervals of a seventh and a ninth, echo one another and become an unforgettable feature of Contrapunctus 10. The first of these scales is
demarcated by a high Cπ that makes for both climax and also a
feeling of constraint, after the scale’s initial sense of release
(D>C; bar 3). Cπ also abrogates that initial C∏, so that the music
can tilt toward the subdominant—and it is the subdominant, G
minor, that accommodates the answer (not the dominant). This
casts a sober shadow over what is already a very heterodox fugal
exposition.
After the answer the soprano inverts the scale, as though to
cradle the two remaining entries of the four-part exposition.
These entries confound expectation by arriving in inversion and
also in stretto. A link leads to further entries, now in a closer
stretto: the recto subject answered by the inversion [bars 14–17].
Bach makes it look easy, this utterly improbable contrapuntal
feat that throws up new expressive chords on almost every beat.
Anyone who doubts the potential for eloquence inherent in the
technical devices of fugue, such as inversion and stretto, should
be won over by this page. Tovey called it “one of the profoundest and most beautiful Bach ever wrote.”
A few bars later there is a tear in the fabric of the composition.
The involved history of The Art of Fugue, some of which has
been sketched on page 37, explains this. Bach’s original autograph manuscript transmits Contrapunctus 10 in an early version; both early and ﬁnal versions became known as soon as the
work appeared, since for some reason—perhaps because the versions are so different—both were included in the 1751 publication. While almost all modern editors omit (that is, suppress) the
autograph version, it is included in a recent Bärenreiter edition

Contrapunctus 10 / 41

edited by Klaus Hofmann, and also in the venerable Czerny edition of 1838, still in print. It began at bar 23 of the ﬁnal version.
The whole ﬁrst section, Tovey’s profound and beautiful page,
was a later addition.
Skip all of bars 1–22 in Contrapunctus 10, omit the bass and
alto lines from bars 23–26, make two notational changes, and
you have the version of Bach’s autograph, except for a few minor
variants later.

Section 2: Bars 23–56
In the absence of titles for the fugues in Bach’s autograph, the
early version of Contrapunctus 10 is often designated Fuga 6
(since it occupies the sixth position in that source, not the tenth),
and this will be a convenient label for the discussion here.
Fuga 6 began at bar 23 of Contrapunctus 10, so it began with
an orthodox exposition, setting forth a subject that inverts the
basic theme of The Art of Fugue (introduced in Contrapunctus 1;
see example 5a, page 35). This neutral-sounding fugue subject
could hardly contrast more strongly with the enigmatic subject
of Contrapunctus 10.
I have called the exposition of Fuga 6 orthodox, but it is in fact
unusually relaxed. The high-ﬂying soprano accompaniment to
the answer in the tenor drops out at once, never becoming a regular countersubject. Bach writes free counterpoint for the remaining entries, ﬂowing, seamless, soaring, ever-new. Eventually he
settles on a common, even commonplace imitative ﬁgure gliding
up and down the interval of a fourth in eighth notes, emerging
on this occasion from the end of the subject [bars 33–37]. The
same ﬁgure runs over from the fourth entry to the next episode

42 / Contrapunctus 10
Example 7

22

. . . . .

26

[38–43]—now ornamented, rather surprisingly, with a trill—
and shapes several others.
How does this sit in Contrapunctus 10, after the extra page has
been added to precede it? Not altogether well. The added voices
in bars 23–26 are crude and unlovely; I cannot believe that Bach
was responsible for this join. (One can play the piece with an elision, as in example 7.) Also there is something slack about the
succession of ideas. The rich, involuted ﬁrst section of the work
extends for 22 bars—and 22 bars later the second section has
hardly got past its mild, relaxed exposition; the music is perfect
in itself, but the contrast is unsettling. It is not like Bach to proceed from complex to simple. The relaxed exposition in Fuga 6
feels lax in Contrapunctus 10.
Get over it! as of course we do, when the music picks up
energy with the next entry, in the alto [bars 44–48]. In Fuga 6 this
alto entry brought with it low sonorities for the ﬁrst time, and a
new feeling of gravity, set against the very high, airy beginning.
If we are playing or listening to Contrapunctus 10, we will recognize the counterpoint offered by the tenor at this point. It is the
original enigmatic subject. Or at least, we should recognize it;
with the line hidden away in an inner voice, it could be missed by
listeners and even, possibly, by some players.
And how did this sit in Fuga 6? What in bar 44 of Contra[Example7]

Contrapunctus 10 / 43

punctus 10 returns as something old and known, namely the
original enigmatic subject, presents itself in bar 22 of Fuga 6 as
something new: a new, belated countersubject, a conﬁguration
less likely to strike the listener as enigmatic than simply obscure.
Absent the ﬁrst page of Contrapunctus 10, it sounds like another
quasi-improvisational addition to the contrapuntal web accruing
around the Art of Fugue subject. Attention will likely focus at this
point on a prominent ascending line in the bass.
Even at the next entry, this obscure countersubject is only
beginning to peck its way out of the surrounding counterpoint
[bars 53–56].
The difﬁcult birth requires special measures, anticipated by
the fast-moving line accompanying the original answer to the Art
of Fugue subject [bars 26–30]. As we have seen, this line did not
become a countersubject at that point; it is probably too exuberant to fulﬁll that function (and the little rhythmic spurt in bar 27
too volatile). It has a special dramatic role to play. In a tentative
form, it begins by inﬁltrating those episodes built on the gliding
ﬁgure [bars 43, 49–51], hunting for a way back into the fugue
after having missed its chance—something it achieves in the
next, much more powerful episode.

Bars 56–65
Many so-called episodes in fugues are less than “episodic”; they
function not as interludes but as links or transition. Links are
often required—from a subject entry to an important cadence,
for example. Other episodes are more than episodic; the episode
of bars 56–65 drives the fugue. As the voices led by the tenor in
bar 56 march around the circle of ﬁfths, the style changes subtly:

44 / Contrapunctus 10

the music runs more simply now, in two voices only (some of the
time), harmonically repetitious, and more sinewy, with the ﬂowing line itself newly shaped for action.
What the episode is leading to is the emergence of the obscure
countersubject (or, the reemergence of the enigmatic subject)
into the light of day—its emancipation, in a sense. This happens
only when its gnomic opening utterances and then its upward
scale, with its always expressive span of a seventh, stand out high
in the soprano [bars 66–70]. Later it will stand out again in the
soprano and also in the bass, that is to say, in both outer voices
[bars 75–79, 85–89, 103–7]. And emancipation entails a new
modality. At bar 63 the high note A in the bass transforms the
span of a minor ninth—the heart and soul of the line since its
ﬁrst appearance—into a major ninth (the upward scale G>A).
This is something of a turning point. From here on, remarkably,
the piece stays in the major mode for almost the whole of its
course; somewhat late, it also turns to new keys, but in a strange
way this counts for less than the new modality.

Bars 66–98
We arrive upon the diffused climax of the fugue, a plateau comprising three entries of the combined subjects—the Art of Fugue
subject and the once-enigmatic, once-obscure, now-emancipated
subject—and three episodes. The former subject actually
appears each time at the same pitches, in one octave or another
(except for one pitch in bar 85), and the episodes bear a strong
family resemblance, in that each consists of sequences of two-bar
units and each hinges on the same rhythm, an upbeat of three
eighth notes. It now becomes clear that Bach fashioned the sub-

Contrapunctus 10 / 45

jects to combine in invertible counterpoint of many kinds, that is,
at many intervals. They go together when one or the other is
doubled in thirds or sixths, and even when both are (as nearly
happens in bars 102–7). The possibilities are endless. After a
slow start, Contrapunctus 10 shows off these contrapuntal
devices as clearly and joyfully as any other fugue I can think of
(the classic case is the Fugue in G Minor from the WTC, book 2).
One cause for the expansive new mood has already been mentioned, the new modality; in later entries the harmony is predominantly major, though the Art of Fugue subject itself may
maintain its minor-mode form. Another cause is the sensuous,
almost buttery quality of the strings of thirds and sixths as they
surge together and pull apart, in a sort of mobile double helix.
(This texture has been heard before, in bars 16–20. It has
reminded one German critic of waltzes by Johann Strauss, Jr.)
Once the scale that moves up through a seventh is doubled in
thirds, so that it covers a ninth—as in bar 87—it registers expansion rather than constraint, as it did before. The sobriety that
marked the ﬁrst page of Contrapunctus 10 yields to opulence
and play.
As to the episodes: though closely related, they grow successively more complex and—Tovey’s word—profound.

.

.

Bars 70–74: While the ﬁrst of the three episodes makes use of the
gliding scale ﬁgure covering a fourth, once again, this always
glides up, never down, taking wing up to high C at the very top
of Bach’s keyboard. Inasmuch as the ﬁgure emerges from the
conclusion of both the subject and the countersubject [bar 69],
this episode is heard very directly in reference to the immediately
preceding entry, as a celebration of its breakthrough.
Bars 79–84: The second episode blurs its underlying structure by
means of a wonderfully skillful lyric gesture in the soprano. It

46 / Contrapunctus 10
Example 8
a.

1

2

3

80

85

b.b.

3 inverted
2

1

90
inverted
recto

95

shifts the new three-note upbeat motif—which already feels
more purposeful than that of the ﬁrst episode—to another position in the sequential unit. Example 8a attempts to elucidate this.
The actual soprano line from the score has been extracted and
printed with stems pointing down, while the strict sequence that
was Bach’s starting point is shown with dotted stems pointing up.
Bars 89–98: The third episode blurs its sequential nature further.
Example 8b, an explanatory score of a different kind, X-rays the
full texture to show only notes that I read as functional—the
three-note figure of a turn leading to one or more leaps of a
fourth—in whatever voices they come. Everything else has been
omitted from example 8b . . . except for the murmuring chromatic notes that blur things further yet, and the masterly ﬁnal
transformation of both the turn ﬁgure and the leap: these are
details I could not leave out. Bach, like his God, is in the details.

]8elpmaxE[

.

Contrapunctus 10 / 47

What is moving as well as masterly about the third episode is
the (retrospective) resonance with the first section of Contrapunctus 10, the added page. In broad terms, the fugue ﬁnally
regains that page’s richness, depth, and intricacy. More speciﬁcally, it ﬁnally picks up on the resource of inversion explored
there, bringing together the opening sinking-down motif and its
springing-up inversion—in ornamented versions: perhaps we
recognize them as such only when Bach begins to stress the
inversion and isolates it by an evocative rest [bars 94, 96–97], as
the sequential unit accelerates from two bars to one (indicated in
example 8b by extended barlines). The present ﬁve-note ﬁgure
softens and demystiﬁes the original three-note motif.

Bars 98–120
The third episode ends with a sigh. Its material is exhausted or,
one would prefer to say, has fully realized its potential and its
function by the time of the cadence in bar 98. Though a half
cadence, this is perhaps the strongest (least gentle) in the whole
piece, echoing similar cadences in bars 22, 56, and 79.
One could hardly conceive of a single episode continuing
through the manifest break in bar 98, switching from G minor to
B-ﬂat major and from one motif to another. What we have after
the cadence is a transition from the cadence to the next entry, a
transition that also achieves something like a delicate recapitulation, for bars 98–102 retrace 48–52—down to the tentative
intrusion of the flowing figure spanning a ninth that first
appeared in 28–31. The ﬂowing ﬁgure, which plays so salient a
role in the fugue, which reached its apogee in bars 56–66 and has
not been heard from since, comes back at full force after the

48 / Contrapunctus 10

entry [bars 107–11]. Then free imitation produces one more
beautiful “episode,” a new transition to the ﬁnal entry and the
tonic key.
Contrapunctus 10 begins, for me, in mystery and ends with a
small mystery of a different sort. The fugue’s ﬁnal entry does
return to the “home” key (and mode), D minor, in its ﬁrst and
last bars—with strong F-major and B-flat-major sonorities
between, however [bars 107–14]. One would have expected some
propping-up of the tonic in the closing bars. Yet even as the bass
establishes the ﬁrst strong cadence (A<D) in the whole fugue,
the tenor hesitates to admit ﬁnality, and when it does, the piece
stops short on the second beat of the ﬁnal bar.
Even with the fermata that Bach writes on that beat, this
makes for the most understated ﬁnal cadence in The Art of Fugue.
I struggle to make out what it is saying, or declining to say, about
the music it terminates.
Still, more than almost any other Bach fugue, Contrapunctus 10
will reveal new secrets as one plays and studies it again and again.
(The Art of Fugue “must, indeed, be played many times before its
deceptive lucidity can be penetrated,” writes Charles Rosen.) The
trills at bars 39–41, for example, though they seem surprising at
ﬁrst, can be seen and heard to anticipate another trill at bar 47—
a functional trill, in that as written for Fuga 6, it adds deﬁnition
to the obscure countersubject and conﬁrms a new terminus for it.
A similar series of trills also appears at another point in The Art
of Fugue, in Contrapunctus 3. What is the aesthetic weight, if any,
of such interfugue similarities? There are other points in Contrapunctus 10 that seem to reach out beyond the immediate text:
at bars 3, 23–28, 31–35 (recalling Contrapunctus 1), and 119–20,

Contrapunctus 10 / 49

to cite a few. To say nothing of the rhythmic identity between
those clipped three-note utterances, sinking down/springing up,
dark/light, and the hieratic, almost counterintuitive rendition of
the Art of Fugue subject in Contrapuncti 8 and 11.
To pursue these nuances, one would have to dip into the longstanding debate about “cyclicity” in The Art of Fugue as a whole.
Is this formidable work to be experienced as a single large cyclic
unit, rather than (or in addition to) a series of distinct entities, and
if so, just how—what kind of cyclicity? One would be drawn to
all the other fugues, fugues outside the purview of this short
book, and the canons. A prospect to welcome. Do not take
Bullivant seriously when he insists that “The Art of Fugue is a
complete work whose individual numbers make sense only as
parts of the whole” and calls the musical evidence for this “overwhelming.” There is no such evidence at all for Fuga 6, and only
the most tendentious argument can be made for Contrapunctus
10 (or Contrapunctus 1).

chapter 7

Chromatic Fantasy and
Fugue, BWV 903

I have taken inﬁnite pains to discover another piece of this
kind by Bach, but in vain. This fantasia is unique, and never
had its like. . . . This work, though of such intricate workmanship, makes an impression on even the most unpracticed hearer if it is but performed at all clearly.

This accolade in 1802 by Bach’s ﬁrst biographer, J. N. Forkel, as
translated into English only six years later, is echoed by George
B. Stauffer, a musicologist who has studied the forty-odd surviving early manuscripts of the Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue to
ﬁnd out what he can about its chronology—not too much, as is
usually the case with Bach’s early music. An early version of the
fantasy dates back to Bach’s Weimar years; the fugue may have
been written later.
Stauffer reminds us that this is one Bach composition that
never fell out of sight. Its ﬂamboyance and freedom, pathos and
furor recommended it to the age of Empﬁndsamkeit or sensibility
in the late eighteenth century as well as to several ages of
51

52 / Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue

Romanticism in the nineteenth, resonating in the soundscapes
of both the perfected clavichord and the fully developed modern piano. For virtuosi like Liszt and Busoni, this was the only
Bach they performed at concerts as originally notated, without
being tricked out for the modern instrument. In 1910 Heinrich
Schenker put out an edition of the Chromatic Fantasy and
Fugue accompanied by a fifty-page monograph, still one of the
most comprehensive discussions of any Bach fugue to be found
in the musicological literature.

FANTASY

This work owes its fame principally to the fantasy, and of course
this is only right. The fantasy is Bach at his most Baroque, Bach
at his most extravagant, untrammeled, physical, in your face.
The work is a useful corrective for those devotees of the composer drawn especially to the cool technical virtuosity that he
liked to display in his later years—in The Musical Offering, The
Art of Fugue, and works like the Fugue in E Major from The
Well-Tempered Clavier, book 2. The Bach who daunted traveling
virtuosos in contests of improvisation, the seething, ﬁery, histrionic Bach seldom shows himself so openly as in the Chromatic
Fantasy.
The word “untrammeled” may raise eyebrows, since whatever Bach did in the heat of actual improvisation, what he wrote
down always has a strong semblance of underlying order and
precision. The overall harmonic framework of this particular
assault on tonality is simplicity itself. As to rhythm, the ebb and
ﬂow of the storm after the opening pair of lightning bolts is controlled by various calculated patterns of three, five, six, and

Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue / 53
Example 9

50

twelve sixteenth notes (not in that order) [bars 3–20], as Schenker
showed, and Schenker supplied something similar himself when
he composed his own arpeggios for the sequel, in which Bach
simply used a shorthand of half-note chords with the instruction
arpeggio [33–48]. Both Bach and Schenker were using musical
notation to induce performances that would sound spontaneously varied.
It is in the arpeggiated passage that Bach begins to bring the
most extreme of chromatic chord progressions . . . progressions
not to be heard in fugues or Brandenburg Concertos . . . and he
continues on the same course in the protracted section, marked
“Recitativo,” that brings the fantasy to its superb dying close on
a long tonic pedal [49–75, 75–79]. The music moans and rages
with repetitions of short, slow ﬁgures, mostly upbeat-downbeat
units in which the downbeats are typically the same plain
descending step, whereas the upbeats, broken up into patterns of
short notes, are wildly and fantastically various (example 9).
There are about eleven such ﬁgures in the twenty-ﬁve bars of the
recitative proper, and eight more in the closing passage over the
tonic pedal. They would make for rhetorical overkill (even for
the Baroque era) if not for Bach’s stupefying modulations.
Some commentators ﬁnd the fugue something of a letdown
after the fantasy, but this kind of feeling or judgment relies
on false expectations, expectations derived from works like
Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony where the movements trace a self[Example9]

54 / Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue

consciously teleological course. There is a wide range of relationship between the “movements” that Bach wrote as introductions
to fugues—fantasias, preludes—and the fugues themselves.
(Sometimes he wrote them at different times and brought them
together later; this is apparently the case with the Fantasy and
Fugue in A Minor—see page 121—and may be the case here
too.) They can be kindred as in the Passacaglia and Fugue in C
Minor and the Prelude and Fugue in A Minor from the WellTempered Clavier, book 2, or mysteriously remote as in E-flat
Minor or F-sharp Minor from book 1. E-ﬂat Major in book 1 has
been a stumbling block for many. With the Chromatic Fantasy
and Fugue, the metronomic motion of the fugue makes a grand
overall rhythmic resolution for the ﬁts and starts of the fantasy. As
for extravagance and chromaticism, it is as extravagant as a fugue
can be and as chromatic as a fast fugue can be.
And whereas some fantasia-fugue pairs stress the contrast
between the spontaneous and the composed, in the Chromatic
Fantasy and Fugue the sense of improvisation lasts throughout
the fugue itself. The radical modulations, the freedom of the ﬁguration, the instability of both the fugue subject and the countersubject, the outbursts of homophony—all of this feels like
inspiration found on the spur of the moment. It’s hard not to
believe that the fugue originated as an improvisation, however
much it was tightened up when Bach wrote it down. By writing
it down Bach created a text, which players can practice and
which critics have been exclaiming over since 1802. Whether he
conceived of it as the same kind of text as that of a didactic fugue
in the WTC or The Art of Fugue—a text to study and savor at
leisure, rather than display as a trophy of improvisation—is
another question.

Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue / 55

Critics whose method includes “close readings” must always
guard against overinterpretation, especially, of course, with texts
implicated with performance of one kind or another. Homer
and Shakespeare are examples. In music, important examples
are jazz and the early keyboard (clavier and organ) works of
Bach . . . each presenting different problems: with jazz we have
recordings but usually no scores, and with Bach we have scores
but can only imagine, never hear the actual improvisation. Such
texts are not off-limits to criticism—they just require tact, above
all, and a sharp awareness of the limitations of analysis. I do not
think my usual critical method would have gotten very far with
the Chromatic Fantasy; a little shakily, I come up to speed again
with the Chromatic Fugue.

FUGUE

We are of course dealing with a very different genre from The
Well-Tempered Clavier—music for display rather than study, for
spontaneous effect rather than learning or subtlety or reﬁned
detail. (Not that this piece lacks its own kind of subtlety.) It seems
light-years ahead of other virtuoso fugues for keyboard left by
Bach, such as two early works in A minor, BWV 894 and BWV
944, perpetuum mobile compositions with subjects in continuous
sixteenth-note motion that persists throughout the episodes: see
example 2 (page 18). There is also a capacious Fugue in B Minor
on a Theme by Albinoni, two versions of which (BWV 951 and
951a) can be found in the back pages of the Bach complete editions, a work with interesting points of contact with the
Chromatic Fugue. These early fugues extend themselves by
stamina, by means of multiple subject entries and generous (lux-

56 / Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue

uriant, rambling) episodes in various keys. They have no
recourse at all to fugal artiﬁce, beyond invertible counterpoint.
The present fugue is a piece of this general type built on a subject with real rhythmic character, to say nothing of involuted
melody and harmonic implications far beyond the range of those
earlier efforts. On this outing Bach has rejected (or outgrown) the
use of sheer whirl for purposes of brilliance and compass. The
music achieves what Spitta called its “demoniacal rush” still
without recourse to contrapuntal devices such as thematic combinations, stretto, inversion, and the like. Even the countersubject comes and goes casually.
The subject is highlighted at almost all of its appearances by
being launched, as it were, by a strong preparatory cadence.
Eight bars long, the subject appears eleven times. The piece as a
whole runs to 161 bars, nearly five minutes in performance,
twelve minutes including the Fantasy.

Subject and Answer: Bars 1–16
In a work of this sort, then, the subject counts for all, or nearly
all. This subject keeps us on edge throughout, partly because it
submits to so much variation, but also because it is so intriguing
in itself, even cryptic—as Schenker chose to demonstrate by reducing it to the primal progression A G F E D [bars 1, 4, 6, 7, 8],
noting how “the veil is lifted from a wondrous and profound
mystery” (example 10a). “What inspired construction!!,” he adds.
The mystery lies not in the subject’s relatively modest chromaticism but in its ambivalent tonality. If fugue admits any
axiom, it is that the subject deﬁnes the tonality, but heard in the
abstract, this subject veers dangerously toward the dominant;

Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue / 57
Example 10
a.
5

b.

60

the opening interval A–C [bars 1–2] defines not the tonic D
minor but A minor, the dominant key. In this context E–G [3–4]
has to suggest the dominant of the dominant, E minor, and E
minor oversteps the range of D minor. (These very harmonies
are spelled out later in transposition [bars 61–66], and elsewhere
this first half of the subject is harmonized in many different
ways, seldom in an unambiguous D minor or equivalent key.)
Immediately the B∫ in bar 5 cancels obscurantist E-minor harmony. On B∫ the motif inverts grandly and cascades down to a
very forceful D-minor cadence—compensation (overcompensation, perhaps?) for the mystiﬁcation before.
We can now see how Schenkerian reduction obscures, sedates,
and indeed betrays the dynamic process central not only to this
fugue’s subject, but also to the way it will develop. The B∫
melodic peak will function as a crux globally as well as locally. In
several later subject entries it generates an altogether unusual
canon; in others it precipitates a breakdown of polyphonic texture into thick chords. And a sequence formed from the melodic
peak detonates the biggest explosion in the whole of this highly
combustible composition [bars 135–40].
The crux of bar 5 also inﬂects the fugue’s rhythmic structure.

58 / Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue

For with the help of an aggressive, dissonant trill in the countersubject, starting at bar 13, bar 5 earns the force of a downbeat—
one that cuts across the normal downbeats, which come on the
even bars (starting with bars 2 and 4) and which are strongly
afﬁrmed at key points later [bars 91, 132, 155]). The rogue accents
invigorate the music and contribute to the overall drive.
Every entry of the subject “contains an element of uncertainty,” as A. E. F. Dickinson puts it in his book on Bach’s fugues.
“The fugue is chromatic, then, per se.” The answer (a tonal
answer) is lucid enough—it traces the intervals D>G and
Bπ>D—but it only comes twice. And the harmonic interval of
a seventh between the beginning of the answer and the countersubject tells us at once that this is a fugue with a pretty short fuse
[bar 9]. Hans von Bülow in his edition of the Chromatic Fantasy
and Fugue changed the answer so as to start on E and cancel the
dissonance, understandably infuriating Schenker and fueling
one of his many polemics.

Bars 17–97
The long ﬁrst episode maps out well the scope of the fugue to
come [bars 27–40]. But after its opening sally of upward fourths
in the soprano, it seems to me both weak and peculiar—peculiar
in thematic material: neither the left-hand thirds nor the motifs in
bars 36–40 seem to belong in this fugue—in harmony: the overlong circles of ﬁfths—and especially in form: the key of F major
established with considerable formality, then quitted at once. This
looks to me less like a relic of improvisation than scar tissue from
early surgery performed on this score, even earlier than the ﬁrst
of the three versions described by Stauffer. Bach may have con-

Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue / 59

templated an entry in F, though it is hard to see how he could have
twisted the subject into the major mode. Another unique and
deﬁning feature of the Chromatic Fugue is that it introduces its
subject nearly a dozen times with never any mode change.
In entry 4 [bars 41–49], the next after the exposition and the
long ﬁrst episode, what feels like an improvisatory variation of
the subject turns out to be the start of a purposeful process, the
dismantling of the fugue subject in several stages. Bach varies the
subject at the melodic peak, softening it with appoggiatura
eighth notes. These expressive diminutions would spell pathos in
any other context; here they have a strange grasping effect, and
they sound even stranger in entry 5 [bars 59–66]—almost
uncanny, I feel—when the softened crux is echoed by a canon at
the octave between the alto and the soprano (example 10b). Then
the rest of the subject simply withers away in both voices. Did
Bach consider the cadence of the original subject too grand and
forceful, too ﬁnal-sounding for general use? The cadence was
already obscured in entry 4, and in all later entries it is virtually
smothered with faster matter or omitted altogether.
Entry 5 is contorted further, as to rhythm and harmony alike.
A solidly launched bass A in bar 60 shifts accents from the subject’s second bar to its ﬁrst; this regularizes accents on the odd
bars—on the melodic peak and the beginning of the canon (the
original cadential accent on the even beat has evanesced). The
low A also clouds what is actually a tonic entry by means of a
strong dominant (reinforced, when the entry returns in this form
later, as a pedal [bar 108]).
In entry 6 [bars 76–83] the subject is undermined some more:
for once it is not “launched,” the contour of the opening measure
is blurred, and the harmony reels dangerously—until the crux,
b]–[Example10

60 / Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue

a turning point once again. The subject cadences in the distant
key of B minor.
And entry 7 marks a further breakdown, yet at the same time
a manifest climax, the Chromatic Fugue’s ﬁrst really extraordinary moment.
The key is E minor (no stranger to this work, as we have seen),
and E-minor harmony is frozen by a dominant pedal B positioned, this time, to stress the subject’s second bar [91]—an accent
blown out of the water by the accent on bar 94 at the arrival of the
crux, now presented as a cannonade of fat chords of up to eight
notes shattering the three-part contrapuntal texture. Meanwhile
the countersubject, which began decaying in the previous entry,
melts down into continuous sixteenth-note ﬁgures—up to the
melodic peak, where its principal idea suddenly reappears, a scale
in marching rhythm (dactyls or anapests). It proceeds down two
octaves in the bass, after ratcheting up the harmony under the
melodic peak into a minor ninth chord. Eventually the marching
bass line will be played by the left hand in octaves, a forecast of
Lisztian bravura that must have fascinated musicians of the nineteenth century [bars 158–59].
For Schenker, the collapse into raw homophony has been
meticulously prepared:
Bach would not have been the master he was, and indeed
this profusion of voices would be unconvincing—like a mere
whim—had he not provided detailed advance preparation of
the effect he wished to achieve. One should note the uninterrupted, agitated sixteenth notes in bars 87–93 and the threatening organ point that begins in bar 91! And ﬁnally, the most
inspired stroke: Bach intentionally deletes the last eighth note
in bar 4 of the subject, as if forcibly stiﬂing the voice-leading’s
drive toward a purely contrapuntal continuation!

Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue / 61

Some nineteenth-century editors put the eighth note back, to
Schenker’s renewed exasperation. Harmony, the subject, the
countersubject, and even counterpoint itself break down in the
service of climax. Bach’s deletion makes for an earthier, stomping quality in the crux, and it is no accident that this is the ﬁrst
time since near the beginning of the fugue, several minutes earlier, that the subject sounds out loud and clear in the soprano.
The episodes, past the ﬁrst two, have exhibited a ﬂamboyance that rivals that of the subject entries themselves. The
episode emerging from entry 4 is a composite of two ideas [bars
49–58], both making a vivid textural contrast with the regular
fugal texture (something Bach does not allow in the more compact fugues of the WTC). The two ideas—arpeggiated chords on
the one hand, and a torrent of continuous sixteenth notes, doubled in thirds or sixths, on the other—also contrast sharply with
each other. Then, soon after entry 5, a clear cadence launches a
lively episode that is something like a false stretto ahead of entry
6—another ﬂamboyant gesture [bars 72–75]. Note the touch of
diminution. This tricky preparation helps undermine the entry,
along with other factors already mentioned.

Bars 97–161
For all of its arsenal of climax-inducers, entry 7, poised in its distant key, must obviously still be some way from any contemplated ﬁnal point of rest. What better to defuse the tension at this
point—pour mieux sauter—than a return of the arpeggios of the
texture-inspired episode [bars 97–106]. Entry 8 arrives in due
course, with fine new elaborations [107–14], and, if the next
episode [115–30] feels a little generic, what is mainly needed

62 / Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue
Example 11

132
sequence

140

etc.

here is a fairly long span of time and general circling of the tonic
key. One can feel the fugue approaching its ﬁnal climax in D
minor.
And one has to echo Schenker: what inspired construction!
and doubly inspired on account of the music’s implication with
improvisation. Entry 9, beginning on D and biased toward D by
another pedal, turns inevitably toward its proper key, G minor
(see example 11). This is the subdominant—deﬁnitely not where
the fugue can end. In an explosive gust of spontaneity, Bach takes
the crux and its motif, now loaded up with thick chords and the
marching ﬁgure, rams it through to the soprano, and sequences
the whole complex up from the subdominant past the tonic to the
dominant, A. This sequence (E∫ D C B∫ . . . ∫ F Eπ D C∏ . . . ) has
the effect of trumping the canon that blurred the end of entries
5 and 8. What registers so strongly is the grand, scrunching
sound of the two dominant ninth chords, V9 of iv and V9 of v
[bars 135, 139]. While the harmonic progression is not the same
as the by now familiar progression leading into the crux, it is not

Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue / 63

unrelated, and to me it feels like the preordained outcome of
that crucial sound, its exultant apotheosis.
If we can imagine Bach improvising the Chromatic Fugue we
can also imagine him saving the lowest bass entry for the point
directly after this great climax. Very powerful are the successive
accents on bars 139 and 140—and while the bass entrance in bar
140 may be premature and impulsive in respect to the sequence of
bars 135–38, it is majestically on time in respect to the pedal initiated at bar 132. This lowest bass entry, accompanied by a spontaneous new counterpoint of rushing scales, is answered by the
highest soprano entry, with left-hand octaves below [bars 154–60].
The subject counts for all in this fugue. The superb, impatient
ﬂourish at the end stresses the original rhythmic terminus of the
subject, as does the afterbeat.
[Example1]

chapter 8

Prelude and Fugue
in E-ﬂat Major
The Well-Tempered Clavier, Book 1

“This Prelude is nothing less than a Toccata and Double Fugue,”
Tovey states at the beginning of his annotation to the Prelude in
E-ﬂat Major from book 1 of The Well-Tempered Clavier and later,
on the fugue that occupies bars 25–70 of the Prelude: “The only
theoretical irregularity in this four-part Double Fugue is the
extra semiquaver ﬁgure in the soprano of bar 26 which anticipates the genuine answer in bar 27.” Tovey’s instinct was to
defend this fugue from unspeciﬁed charges or suspicions that it
lacked theoretical “regularity”—this from a writer who campaigned tirelessly against false premises in the music theory of his
day. But he was off the mark in this case. Also troublesome is
David Schulenberg’s hearty reference to “full-ﬂedged fugue subjects” in this work (though he should be taken seriously, I think,
when he says it may be the greatest prelude in book 1 of the WTC).
A terminological point: a toccata, for the seventeenth century,
was a segmented composition consisting of a number of free
improvisatory sections and contrapuntal ones that may or may
65

66 / Prelude and Fugue in E-ﬂat Major

not count, from our standpoint, as actual “fugues.” Bach in his
early years wrote eight or nine such toccatas, large-scale pieces for
clavier and organ, which generally include two free sections and
two fugues. By the eighteenth century the genre had coalesced
into the toccata and fugue: a single introductory movement, often
free-standing, and a single fugue. In Bach’s “Dorian” Toccata
and Fugue in D minor for organ, there is little that is improvisatory in the concerto-form ﬁrst movement or in the exceptionally rigorous fugue.
The other so-called Toccata and Fugue in D minor, a stormy
piece once well known in Stokowski’s orchestral transcription
(but quietly dropped out of the 2000 remake of Fantasia), is a toccata—its actual title—in the seventeenth-century tradition, consisting of three big sections, all of them improvisatory and ﬂamboyant: introduction, fugue, and conclusion. The Prelude in
E-ﬂat Major also belongs in this genre. It has one improvisatory
section with two short subsections—I shall call them toccata
fragments—and a large double fugue exhibiting so many free,
improvisatory, “irregular” features that it could never have found
its way into the WTC as a “fugue,” only as part of a special prelude. (David Ledbetter, in his recent book Bach’s Well-tempered
Clavier, reminds us that toccata was an alternative name in the
seventeenth century for one kind of prelude. The “Dorian”
Toccata and Fugue is called Prelude and Fugue in some early
sources.)
If we are ever to imagine what actually happened when Bach
improvised a fugue, it will be with the help of the Prelude in Eﬂat Major, which I take to be a (brilliantly) enhanced record of
keyboard improvisation. Whereas the subject of another improvisatory fugue, the Chromatic Fugue in D Minor, responds

Prelude and Fugue in E-ﬂat Major / 67

uniquely to a unique fantasia, the main subject of this one partakes of the commonest of clay, endlessly remolded. Bach generated fugues with this material at the keyboard over and over
again, I would assume, and when he came to put together The
Well-Tempered Clavier decided it was time to write down his latest version. Even after segregating it from the twenty-four ofﬁcial fugues, he must also have disciplined it carefully to accord
with its new canonic status.

PRELUDE

Toccata Fragments: Bars 1–25
Bach is tracing a myth of genesis, the emergence of order from
inchoate, improvisatory stirrings. A highly developed double
fugue will be brought into being by two distinct toccata fragments, remnants or evocations of keyboard improvisations in
which the fugue’s two subjects are adumbrated, one by one.
Thematic relations between segments of a toccata are a typical
feature of the genre, not a special innovation or reﬁnement by
Bach.
Yet as written down in the ﬁrst toccata fragment, the improvisatory gestures freeze [bars 1–10]. The counterpoint is of the
sort that lies under the keyboard player’s hand—a ﬂowing ﬁgure
in sixteenth notes repeating itself insistently—until the ﬁgure
suddenly accelerates strictly, without any change in its shape. It
is on the point of becoming dangerously rigid when a ﬂourish
leads to an abrupt cadence; the whole thing lasts only ten bars.
(The passage was less rigid, incidentally, in an earlier version of
the prelude.)
The second toccata fragment brings to mind Bach’s fame as an

68 / Prelude and Fugue in E-ﬂat Major

organist and the many calls he received to test out and vet new
instruments. The ﬁrst thing he did on these occasions, according
to his early biographer, Forkel, was to draw out all the stops and
play with the full organ. “He used to say in jest that he must ﬁrst
of all know whether the instrument had good lungs.” One can
associate this routine with the slow-moving, dense, pensive style
of this music, which indeed sounds a lot better on the organ than
on harpsichord or clavichord.
However, all of the organ stops are surely not pulled out. And
this meandering search for rich sonorities conceals (or embraces)
a purposeful motivic process. The counterpoint at the start formulates the main stretto that will be used in the double fugue—
a primitive motif involving an upward leap of a fourth in close
stretto at the lower fourth or upper ﬁfth [bars 10, 11–12, 16–17].
The bass expands this motif into foreshadowings of the main
fugue subject [bars 12–13, 16–17, 18–20].
Both toccata fragments come to the same formal half cadence
on the dominant, B∫. The fugue’s opening subject entry is in the
dominant. From the second fragment Bach derives the main,
slow subject of the upcoming double fugue, and from the ﬁrst—
from its insistent motif—he spins the other, faster subject, stiffening the end of it to provide more distinct rhythmic deﬁnition.
Even the one minor-mode tonality hinted at in the toccata [bar
16] proves to be prophetic, when C minor emerges as the most
prominent secondary area in the double fugue.

Double Fugue: Bars 25–70
This fugue should not really be construed structurally apart from
its improvisatory attendants. Almost the whole composition

Prelude and Fugue in E-ﬂat Major / 69

seems driven by much the same melodic idea, presented again
and again starting from the same pitch, B∫: the primitive motif
B∫>E∫ D | C (B∫) of the second toccata fragment, or its expansion as the main fugue subject B∫>E∫ D >| G (F).
Both melodic conﬁgurations also appear starting from other
pitches, of course. But most of the entries starting from B∫—ten
of them in all—stand out for one reason or another and so can
be experienced as structural:

.
.
.

.

Bars 10, 25, and 49: Entries start up again after parallel half
cadences that settle heavily—and, at bar 49, somberly—on B∫,
the dominant of E-ﬂat major.
Bar 42: The entry stands out because the countersubject returns
after a fairly long absence.
Bar 61: Organ music is evoked, once again, in particular a climactic device well known from the “St. Anne” Fugue—a thinning of texture toward the end of an organ fugue, with slowly
descending high voices that set off a grand subject entry low in
the pedals, an entry that reintroduces and supports the full texture.
Bar 64: Here the subject stands out because it is in the soprano,
expands further to become G>| C B∫>E∫ D>G∫ | F E∫D | E∫,
and is at the same time normalized, in that it ﬁnally comes to rest
on the tonic note, E∫.

There is special point to the word “ﬁnally” in this situation. Both
subjects of this fugue are treated very freely. Both (to put it
another way) are very unstable. The main subject as it appears in
the tonic, in the form E∫>A∫ G >| C B∫, asserts the tonality
weakly because it ends on the dominant and on a weak beat—
and even this much deﬁnition is denied to it much of the time, for
although the beginning entry (B∫>E∫ D>| G F) promises that F
is destined to sink to E∫ [bar 27], this closure is usually evaded.

70 / Prelude and Fugue in E-ﬂat Major

The tonality vacillates; the big bass entry near the end simply
hangs on to its penultimate note, G, skipping (or skidding past)
F altogether [bars 62–63]. Only after this does an extended
soprano entry guide the subject down from G∫ and F to E∫—a
clear tonic at long last.
The tonal equivocation in this work becomes a nice problem
for the music theorist who might wish to engage with its network of nuances. In broader terms it matters to any player or listener, for it is probably the equivocal, open-ended subject that
contributes more strongly than anything else to a sense that the
rambling, improvisatory quality of the second toccata fragment
lasts throughout the rest of the composition. In this “free” quality the E-ﬂat Prelude fugue is quite unlike the WTC’s labeled
fugues, as has already been noted.
Equally unstable, the second, faster subject of this fugue
appears as many times freely as strictly (ﬁve) and drops out of the
composition well before the end. Yet the fugue is permeated by
the toccata’s short flowing figure in its original, undeveloped
form. This appears in nearly every bar, often more than once.
(The ﬁgure even elbows its way an extra time into the initial
fugal exposition—this was Tovey’s “theoretical irregularity.”)
Rigor that bordered on the obsessive in the 10-bar ﬁrst toccata
fragment makes good sense in the 45-bar fugue, or so it seems to
me—a compositional feat to reckon with.
Strict and free. The fugue’s opening exposition is another free
feature, in the deepest sense: the main subject appears in only
three of the four voices, the second subject in only two [bars 25–
34]. And immediately after this the fugue plunges unexpectedly
toward the mediant, G minor [bar 35]. From here on ruminative
strettos in minor keys stamp this music with unusual gravity.

Prelude and Fugue in E-ﬂat Major / 71
Example 12

57

Almost every entry of the main subject appears as part of a
stretto—typically in the form ﬁrst heard in the second toccata
fragment—and the more intense junctures also involve false
strettos. Thus the concatenation of upward fourths in bars 41–44
builds up such pressure that counterpoint loses hold and the
voices coalesce into a singular outburst of regal passion. This is an
amazing moment, more like the opening chorus of a cantata of
penitence or supplication than a keyboard fugue. Doesn’t this
count as an “irregularity”? One feels an aftershock in bar 52.
The free flow of this fugue allows for scarcely any strong
cadences; the half cadence in bar 49 marks the point where Bach
sights the tonic and begins a long buildup to a sustained climax.
Characteristically, the tonality is deﬂected, and the strettos pro-

72 / Prelude and Fugue in E-ﬂat Major

ceed in a discursive, rolling motion, almost somnolent, like a
blind giant (though the four entries in bars 53–59 march in strict
order, at successive intervals of a bar and a half ). The most
intense stretto of all comes in the highest register, a de facto onebar stretto at the unison: see example 12.
Another pileup of strettos achieves resolution, this time by
gestures not of passion but pain [bars 64–70]. The climactic
soprano entry clutches up and up but cannot reach G, only G∫.
Supported by C∫ a moment later, this echoes that somber G∫
lodged in our memory from the half cadence at bar 49, the
fugue’s central cadence.
[Example12]

FUGUE

At one time many musicians were disturbed by the mood
sequence from the Prelude in E-ﬂat with its four-part double
fugue to the much lighter, three-voiced Fugue in E-flat that
comes next. Riemann in his book on the WTC dismissed the latter as superﬂuous, a “harmless merry postlude,” and Keller practically begged readers of his book to approach the two pieces
individually, not as a pair. Busoni heartlessly replaced this book 1
fugue with the weightier Fugue in E-ﬂat Major from book 2—
thus joining one fugue to another fugue “vaguely but distressingly similar in theme,” as Tovey noted sourly. For Tovey it was
axiomatic that Bach valued clear contrasts between preludes and
fugues more than “casual resemblances” of thematic content.
Certainly the contrast between the fugue and the prelude is
more than a matter of mood or tone. Whereas the prelude is
exceptional in never modulating to the dominant, the fugue hits
the dominant hard as early as bar 2. (This is one of the few fugues

Prelude and Fugue in E-ﬂat Major / 73

in the WTC with a modulating subject.) Likewise, the tidy A B A
structure of the fugue contrasts with the at ﬁrst discursive, then
heavily climax-oriented trajectory of the prelude.
Yet there is a good deal more than “casual resemblance”
between the main subject of the double fugue of the prelude and
the subject of the “ofﬁcial” fugue; the ﬁrst half of the latter subject, which is so clearly (pointedly?) demarcated from the second
half, is little more than an ornamentation of the former. There is
also an obvious echo of the end of the prelude in the fugue’s last
subject entry, in the alteration of G to G∫ [bar 34]. C∫ comes not
long after. I also experience clearly the parallelism between
strong submediant (C-minor) areas in both works.
Ledbetter points to the subtle role of chromaticism in this
work, starting with the (piquant, if not adjacent) clash between
A∫ and Aπ at the very beginning and culminating in the alteration
of G to G∫ near the end, as just mentioned. This culmination is
also a witticism, I think, hinting at a rhetorical or improvisatory
ﬂourish mufﬂed before its time. “Fugue in the seventeenth century was regarded as a play of wit, not pedantry, and as with
Haydn, so with Bach, the tradition continued.” For a witty place
in the otherwise sober prelude, see bar 67, where Bach brings the
ever-present ﬂowing ﬁgure from the toccata once—just once—
in inversion.

chapter 9

Fugue in E Major
The Well-Tempered Clavier, Book 2

The conventional form diagrams and tables of music pedagogy
give or can give the wrong impression of an art we experience as
a process (or stasis) in time. Diagrams intrude on listening by
asserting their own kind of direct linearity. They announce major
articulations and endings ahead of time, before they have been
suggested in sound, and offer unambiguous ground plans for patterns in time that are existential and often tenuous. But with some
misgivings I do offer a tabular analysis in this case, to make what
seems to me a capital point about this famous and famously beautiful fugue, “one of the clearest in intention ever written,” according to A. E. F. Dickinson in his book Bach’s Fugal Works.
What Dickinson seems to have been alluding to in his gnomic
way (but nobody else talks about it at all) was the unusually
strong segmentation of this music into long parallel phrases.
Phrases of virtually the same length, demarcated by very sonorous cadences, all start in the same way, with closely knit fourpart expositions of the subject. Past the opening, these expositions
75

76 / Fugue in E Major
Phrase
number

Number
of bars

1

9

Exposition

→

half cadence

2

8

Stretto 1

→

cadence in C-sharp minor

(vi)

3

8

Stretto 2

→

cadence in F-sharp minor

(ii)

4

13

(dominant of E: I)

Stretto 3 (varied subject) leading without a strong cadence to
Stretto 4 (diminished subject) + more entries
→

5

cadence in G-sharp minor

(iii)

Stretto 5: return of stretto 1 + extra bass entry

9

→

ﬁnal cadence in E

(I)

are pressed into various strettos; after a time the rich cadences
begin to echo one another, like the slow chime of the big gong in
a gamelan. A very large hypermeter makes itself felt, at least
vaguely comparable to that of a composition in theme-andvariation form—a theme followed by several variations. Segmentation of this kind is particularly impressive in so compact a
composition.
Parallelism breaks down in phrase 4, of course, under the
pressure of events, when an extra stretto (stretto 4) stirs up the
fugue’s climax of involution. Yet this single extended phrase also
begins with a stretto in all four voices, stretto 3 [bars 23–26]—
and for a while, if you are not looking at a diagram, you could
take it for another “variation.”
[Table1]

Phrase 1: Bars 1–9
Starting in the bass, the exposition proceeds through successively
higher and higher voices, in a hypermeter of three whole notes:
see example 13a. Both features make for a feeling of quiet

Fugue in E Major / 77
Example 13
a.

countersubject

b.

23

grandeur, offset by the more active countersubject. The rising
scale in quarter notes in this countersubject, the eighth-note snap
B<F∏>B, and the syncopated half notes—these will all work
magic over the course of the Fugue in E Major. What is left of the
phrase consists of a spacious cadence on the dominant, a peaceful gesture, coming as it does so close to the beginning of the
composition.
b]–[Example13

Phrase 2 (stretto 1): Bars 9–16
The next phrase brings the ﬁrst of the strettos. Stretto 1, like the
others, is laid out symmetrically in voice pairs: two voices are
introduced as a pair at a close stretto interval—a very close one
in this case, a single whole note—followed after a time by the
other two, in the same disposition. The music does not depart
from the tonic key.
The rest of phrase 2 is saturated by the countersubject, generally with the characteristic eighth-note snap smoothed out and
made lyrical—a free augmentation. This burgeons into an ample
canon or stretto of its own, in all four voices; Bach’s strategy is to
stress the countersubject at the beginning of the fugue, drop it
out of the middle, and restore it in its integral form at the end.

78 / Fugue in E Major

Two strettos this soon in the piece would seem to presage
some complexity, but both the augmentation and the way the
soprano is laid out tend to minimize any potential developmental energy. So at the second cadence there is again an unusually
peaceful feeling at an early point in the proceedings, in spite of
the modulation to C-sharp minor. (This feeling may owe something to the long, almost dreamlike line in ascending quarter
notes that can be traced in bars 12–15 by shunting back and
forth among the octaves: sixteen steps from E∏ up to G∏.)

Phrase 3 (stretto 2): Bars 16–23
In stretto 2 the voices in the pairs are less closely bound, at a
stretto interval of two whole notes.
It is time for intensity to mount, thanks ﬁrst of all to tonal
ambiguity—the stretto comes on E major but in the key of Csharp minor—and then to harmonic and rhythmic tensions
inherent in two new countersubjects. (Neither will be heard after
this phrase.) One of them features a chromatic progression, the
other syncopations and a series of repeated eighth-note turns
[bars 16–17, 17–19, 19–20]. Partly because the syncopations continue into the cadence, the fugue’s second cadence in a minor key,
F-sharp minor, sounds more profound than the ﬁrst, in C-sharp
minor, not only lower.

Phrase 4 (strettos 3 and 4): Bars 23–35
The voices engage at the shortest stretto interval yet, a half note,
and the subject appears in variation.
The fugue is growing more intricate and intense, and to bring

Fugue in E Major / 79

matters to a head, Bach throws the whole book at us (gently).
The mode switches: the stretto brings the subject four times in
the minor mode. The stretto interval tightens. The variation
itself is so subtle that Roger Bullivant in his book on fugue admits
that he caught on to it only after reading the commentary by
Tovey! Tovey haughtily treated such variation procedure as a
commonplace in Bach’s work, but in fact the thematic manipulation on this occasion stands out for its originality and suavity.
A little ﬁgure consisting of two upward steps in quarter notes,
emerging from the varied subject itself (see example 13b), mutters away in various voices throughout the stretto, even before the
second voice materializes. As to rhythmic intricacy, not only has
the music slipped into continuous quarter-note motion, with the
help of the ﬁgure just mentioned, but the surfaces are rufﬂed by
a hint of triple meter in the varied subject (example 13b). Each of
the previous strettos has led fairly quickly to a strong cadence,
and this one seems headed for another, in bar 27.
But this is the point where parallelism among the phrases
breaks down. The cadence is interrupted (made “deceptive”),
and what interrupts is a new stretto, of the subject in diminution.
Bullivant writes as follows about diminution in fugal writing:
“It is not a very common device; while intensifying the movement, it has also the tendency to make the subject disappear into
the ﬂow of the counterpoint.” Just the reverse happens here. The
counterpoint has already begun to ﬂow more smoothly from the
beginning of phrase 4, and this quarter-note ﬂow is now articulated and, as it were, rationalized by the diminution of the subject into quarter notes. The rhythm clears up, and so does the
harmony; perhaps the most beautiful moment in this beautiful
fugue comes as the diminished stretto in the alto—and stretto

80 / Fugue in E Major
Example 14

a.

inversion

diminution

31

b.

36

c.

38

has never sounded more natural—pulls away from the minor
mode toward B major [bar 27].
We seem to be hearing a new voice, a more intimate speaking
voice, volatile and emotional. The eventual response in bars 34–
35 is the most profound cadence yet, in the mediant, G-sharp
minor. The intermediate cadence in 27–28, the fugue’s ﬁrst in the
dominant key, long awaited, is much slighter—radiant, all the
same.
In bar 29, the also radiant ascent to E in the soprano can be
heard as an outcome of the upward-step ﬁgure—and if it also
recalls the original countersubject, that is no accident, as will
become clear in a moment. A ﬁfth subject entry in diminution,
in the bass, after four in the stretto, is answered in the tenor with
another unique thematic manipulation [bars 30–31]. This

Fugue in E Major / 81

answer, at the same time interval as before, brings the subject
much changed: inverted, with the opening note abbreviated
(from a half note to a quarter) and the opening interval
expanded, from the putative step G∏–F∏ to the leap C∏<F∏.
Described in words or referred to a score (example 14a), this
analysis may appear forced: inversion, diminution, abbreviation,
expansion . . . To the ear, however—to my ear—the transformation is not only convincing but also climactic in a quite wonderful way; it is exactly because of the hyperbolic expansion of
the launch that we recognize the ﬁgure as an inversion—as an
answer—at all. Against the whirl of this subject/answer pair in
diminution, and the rich, almost passionate sequence that
emerges from it, the subject in its normal time values can slip by
almost unnoticed [bars 30–32].
c]–[Example14

Phrase 5 (stretto 5): Bars 35–43
Bach moves directly from the G-sharp-minor cadence to the
tonic key E. Stretto 5 recapitulates stretto 2, with the alto, tenor,
and bass entering on the identical pitches at the same time interval, and the soprano at the correct pitch also. With this difference: the soprano waits before sweeping in at a higher octave, like
a diva with a catch in her voice; the abbreviation of the subject’s
opening note in bar 39 makes a comparable effect to that of bars
30, 31, and 32. With this superb entry the highest voice at last
reaches its highest register, which it has not even come close to
since the start of the fugue.
Two bars later an extra entry, in the bass again—extra, after
the four entries of the stretto—leads to the ﬁnal cadence [bars
40–43]. Of all the bass entries, this one reaches lowest down and

82 / Fugue in E Major

in doing so gives us something we have been wanting badly for
a long time without knowing it: as amends for the subject’s boring ending on its opening note, the line continues to sink down
through an entire octave, coming to rest on the low tonic. The
soprano entry beforehand has done something complementary.
These two ﬁnal entries, high and low, cap and close a phrase
that recapitulates matter more closely than usual even in those
Bach fugues that can be said to have recapitulations, or something like them. Back in the tonic key, elements are retrieved and
brought together from both phrases 1 and 2—both of which, of
course, asserted the tonic. From phrase 2, the ﬁrst of the strettos
returns (up to a point) exactly, and from phrase 1, the original
countersubject.
The latter returns right away with new vibrancy in the
soprano, at a higher register than ever before, ushered in by the
diminished inverted subject: see example 14b. (This combination
of subject and countersubject could be the most brilliant of all the
fugue’s thematic manipulations; one can also hear it incorporating the upward-step ﬁgure as expanded to the rising scale from
G∏ to E, in bar 29.) The eighth-note snap E<B>E, a vivid yet
serene reminder of the now distant past, proliferates in the graceful tumble of bars 38–39 and its sequel. Bach reafﬁrms the thematic combination in the alto and then in the tenor with the
opening notes E and D∏—the “correct” inversion notes, at last—
transposed down an octave (see example 14c).
They have to be transposed down because otherwise the left
hand cannot reach them, but if the fugue were sung rather than
played they would certainly be moved back up—and this fugue
has been found to be eminently singable. More than one musician
had tried it out on an a capella choir before the Swingle Singers

Fugue in E Major / 83

dressed it up with scat syllables and a drum track on a hit record
of forty years ago, still in the catalog.
One more unique thing about the Fugue in E Major is worth
noting: the vacuity of its subject. Does any other Bach fugue
make use of anything so primitive? David Ledbetter in his book
on the WTC traces the long history of this stretto-happy six-note
conﬁguration in early fugal writing. It is stock matter in the classic ricercars and fantasias of Johann Jakob Froberger, in the
Ariadne Musica of J. C. F. Fischer—Bach’s model for a series of
fugues in all the keys, though Fischer can only coax his clubfooted Theseus through twenty turns of the harmonic labyrinth,
not twenty-four—and in the principal music textbook of the
time, the Gradus ad Parnassum of Johann Joseph Fux. Even the
striking sectionalization of the Fugue in E Major can be seen as
Bach’s response, supremely artistic and perhaps slightly ironic, to
Fux’s elementary rules for fugal structuring.
He would never have chosen such a subject for the WTC
without meaning to show how common clay could be not so
much molded, drawn out, and worked up as humanized, inspirited. For it is not so much the technical virtuosity of this work
that impresses—the systematic strettos, diminutions, augmentations, inversions, and other thematic manipulations—as its
extraordinary grace and serenity. The Prelude in E Major being
marvelous in its own way, this prelude and fugue has levitated
out of the Well-Tempered Clavier onto Dickinson’s and many
other people’s manifest of music to be taken along to the onceproverbial desert island, to the soon-to-be-discovered habitable,
and therefore musicable planet in outer space.
Dickinson played it on camp pianos in World Wars I and II

84 / Fugue in E Major

and called it “the best safeguard, in abstract sound, of the belief
that whatever may happen to the contrary there will always be a
sane world to make and keep, and incidentally—observe the
cadence—a free England.” Anglophobes can play a different
ornament in place of the four-eighth-note Rule Britannia ﬁgure
in bar 42, or just quarter notes G∏ A (in which case dot the B).

chapter 10

Fugue on “Jesus Christus
unser Heiland”
Clavierübung, Book 3

The Fugue on the chorale “Jesus Christus unser Heiland” counts
as the rogue fugue in the present selection, perhaps, though one
likes to think of every Bach fugue as rogue or phoenix or unicum
in its own special way. It comes from the organ volume of the
Clavierübung, Bach’s comprehensive publication of his keyboard
works, which he issued serially and at leisure over the years 1726
to 1742. Volumes 1, 2, and 4 transmit well-known works like the
Partitas, the Italian Concerto, and the “Goldberg” Variations.
In volume 3, less well known, a massive organ prelude and the
grand “St. Anne” Fugue serve as bookends for a shelf of chorale
preludes of many different kinds, based on chorales associated
with the Lutheran catechism. Eight hymn melodies are each set
twice, ﬁrst as a large-scale piece for full organ with pedals, and
then as a smaller setting for the manuals alone. Included in the
collection is a little set of two-part inventions—Bach’s somewhat
odd name for them is “Duetto”—which are often played on the
harpsichord. The series of manualier chorales also can be played
85

86 / Fugue on “Jesus Christus unser Heiland”

on any keyboard instrument (harpsichord, clavichord, or piano),
not only organ.
The heading “Fuga super ‘Jesus Christus unser Heiland’”
would have categorized the piece for musicians of the time. The
chorale fugue or fughetta is a special keyboard genre going back
to the seventeenth century. A motif taken from the ﬁrst line of a
chorale, usually with some ornamentation, becomes the subject
of a fugue, a fugue that ends with the entire ﬁrst line presented
in its simplest form in augmentation, as though rising above (or
sinking below) the fray. Improvising fugues was part of the
organist’s stock in trade, and in a chorale prelude we can picture
him ruminating fugally on the main music of the hymn he is
about to accompany, arriving at a weighty statement of it as a
prompt to the congregation to start singing.
The present fugue is an almost unimaginably transﬁgured
version of this genre, which Bach also resuscitated and handled
less radically elsewhere in the Clavierübung. It must also be one
of the most dramatic, in the sense of eventful, fugues Bach ever
wrote. The drama begins in a mood of sobriety and pain and
ends in transcendence. The “events” of this chorale fugue can
serve as a focus for my discussion.
The subject comes from line 1 of a short catechism hymn sung
for the Eucharist. Bach altered the fourth note of the melody
from B∫ to Bπ (see example 15), though he set the same chorale
in several other works (including the other chorale prelude on
the same tune in the Clavierübung) without making this alteration; he had to make it here because he wanted to write a stretto
fugue, and certain of the strettos require the alteration. The alteration itself required or rather allowed Bach to write interesting,
often wrenching dissonances (see bars 7, 9, 11, 16, 25, 38, 44, 57,

Fugue on “Jesus Christus unser Heiland” / 87
Example 15. Chorale “Jesus Christus unser Heiland”
vi =

Je sus Chri

stus un ser

Got tes Zorn

sein

Half

Hei

land,

Der von uns den

wandt, Durch das bit ter

er

uns

aus

der

Lei

Höl

den

len Pein.

and 58). The organist and organ historian Norbert Dufourcq,
one of the few commentators who seem to have been struck by
this work, speaks of its chromaticisme tourmenté.
[Example15]

Section 1: Bars 1–19
At the beginning of this stretto fugue, two four-part expositions of
the subject in stretto actually overlap [bars 1–11, 10–19]—a sober,
oppressed, dense inception. Originally the stretto answer follows
the subject after six beats, and indeed the whole of the exposition
falls into a regular 23 meter, the episode between the tenor/alto and
soprano/bass pairs of entries lasting for six beats also.
The next exposition is rhythmically much less regular, indeed
convoluted, willfully so, since in the ﬁrst entry pair the answer
follows after only one beat, and in the second pair after two beats.
Since these extremely tight strettos do not “work” very naturally, we get a lot of tormented chromaticism.
A countersubject, in its original form or in exact inversion,
continues through each of the brief episodes in this section of the

88 / Fugue on “Jesus Christus unser Heiland”
Example 16
a.

inversion

answer 3
countersubject

= de

b.
21

24
8va

27

31

c.
40

fugue, overlapping the entries [bars 5–7, 13–16]—a bit of unobtrusive virtuoso workmanship typical enough of this composer.
But here, I believe, the music itself is intended to be as unobtrusive as the technique. The listener or even the player cannot be
particularly conscious of this countersubject as such, with motion
as characterless as this. All one really hears is a rhythmic layer—
eighth notes against the heavy quarters of the subject (example
16a). This material has yet to reveal its true function, as a matrix
for the evolution of something new and more important.
c]–[Example16

Fugue on “Jesus Christus unser Heiland” / 89

Section 2: Bars 19–30, 30–36
Typically in fugues—though not always, of course—a strong
structural cadence, such as the cadence in the dominant C minor
at bar 19, prepares a subject entry. This does not happen here. A
new section, devoted primarily to the countersubject, begins with
intimations of new energy conveyed by a short eighth-note
upbeat ﬁgure, an upward leap of a fourth taken from the subject
(G>C, C>F, F>B∫). The section continues for sixteen bars—
almost as long as the fugue’s ﬁrst section.
The “event” here is the transformation of that innocuous
countersubject into something newly distinctive and expressive.
In effect, we get a new countersubject, and for congregations
that had known their hymns since childhood it immediately
recalled the last line of “Jesus Christus unser Heiland” (see examples 15 and 16b); the last line of this hymn is doubly memorable
as by far the highest and freest of the four. The ordinary chorale
fugue treats line 1 of its chorale; Bach’s Fugue on “Jesus Christus
unser Heiland” treats line 1, then line 4, then brings lines 1 and
4 together in its unique conclusion. Once again Bach presents the
material in both recto and inverted forms, in the high voices
[bars 23–27], while the low voices issue a knot of subject entries
in close stretto. To hear these as the primary element rather than
as a backdrop would hardly be possible, however; the low entries
are obscured, as none others are in this fugue. (The bass entry
starts not at its ordinary pace but with a momentary diminution—the new eighth-note upbeat C>F—and the tenor entry
blurs as a result of a false stretto in the alto, G>C [bars 23–24].)
As for the transformation process, example 16b does not
attempt to trace but can perhaps suggest the subtlety involved.

90 / Fugue on “Jesus Christus unser Heiland”

The ﬁrst element of change is rhythmic: the abbreviation of the
original four-note pattern, as in bars 3 and 5, to a more shapely and
distinctive pattern of three, as in bars 21 and 23. The second element is melodic: the repeated emphasis on the affective semitone
D∫ C in the three-note ﬁgure C D∫ C, which then shrinks into just
the two notes D∫ C: a truly Bachian stroke of high pathos.
The fugue almost grinds to a halt, as though overcome, on a
low pedal C lasting for two and a half bars [bars 27–29]. A pedal
on C in the key of F minor ought to presage the end of the piece,
or at least the end of a major passage, but the music surges up, agitated by sixteenth notes, till it reaches an extraordinary moment
of collapse and release as the pedal evaporates and the countersubject attains its highest point yet, F G∫ F in the soprano. The
place is both a climax of pathos—the highest G∫ in the composition so far—and a consolation, because of a new stage of melodic
transformation that leads to a placid new cadence. A beautiful
long, relaxed episode, at ﬁrst in only three parts, mulls over the
major-mode sonorities that have been denied to this fugue until
now. The countersubject remains in the spotlight. Contrasting
episodes are routine in Bach’s fugues; what makes this one such
an event is its dramatic, even melodramatic highlighting.
The countersubject has been transformed—has come into its
own, rather—and now it disappears, or rather, it makes a strategic exit. At the cadence, listen to the soaring upward-fourth leaps
in the tenor and the bass [bar 34], the bass G∫ also echoing the
earlier climax on the high G∫ [34, 30].

Section 3: Bars 36–56
By the time of its second large structural cadence, the fugue has
ranged far from its sober, depressed, dense inception. The subject

Fugue on “Jesus Christus unser Heiland” / 91

has been lost. Even the tormented minor mode and its chromaticism have been forgotten, until the cadence twists us back to
B∫ minor, the subdominant. Now the piece shakes itself and
returns to its origins, in a new intense round of entries in stretto,
entries of a very different character.
Having already challenged the subject, as it were, with two
(related) countersubjects, Bach now does something different.
He unleashes a whole arsenal of technical devices to destabilize
the subject—and disorient the listener. The soprano hiccups and
leaps up to an entry placed at the very top of the keyboard, leaving a gap in the middle of the texture [bar 37]. Following the previous alto entry after ﬁve beats (an odd, not the usual even number), this raises a specter of false accentuation to taunt the listener
who remembers her catechism: Je-SUS Chri-STUS un-SER Hei-EILAND. The alto and tenor engage in frantic chromatic gesturing.
Sixteenth-note ﬁgures enter and the bass begins to dance in a de
facto 43 meter, for six bars (equivalent to four and a half bars in 44 :
see example 16c). A clear motif emerges, F E∫ D | E∫>A∫<D,
joined in canon by the soprano: E∫ D C | D>G<C. (This motif,
the most important new thematic element in the fugue, had
already been teased out of the end of the subject in bars 39–41, by
the alto. There is a beautiful forecast of it in bars 25–26.)
Although Bach will now sometimes ﬁt this motif loosely in with
the subject [bars 39–40, 43–44, 51], he will conspicuously not
develop it into a new consistent countersubject.
For a considerable time the counterpoint remains loose and
fantastic. Two rather isolated subject entries in the bass [bars 44–
46, 50–53] are spaced out by episodes [41–43, 46–50, 53–56], and
a larger rhythmic module begins to assert itself, for the entries
and episodes all occupy about the same time span. In the ﬁrst two
of the episodes just mentioned the new motif proliferates, and in

92 / Fugue on “Jesus Christus unser Heiland”

the third it generates a swift new ﬁgure, C>Eπ F< | B∫>E∫.
This forms a canonic sequence driving toward a cadence.

Bars 57–67
Again the subject is losing ground; its stretto energy seems all
played out. But there is still one exceptional contrapuntal tour de
force to come. The next, next-to-ﬁnal event in this fugue answers
to the generic dictate of the chorale fugue: the return of the tonic
key and the apparition of the fugue subject augmented to half
notes.
As if augmentation were not an event momentous enough to
terminate so intense a composition—or as if in the history of the
genre chorale fugue the very device had worn thin—when Bach
brings the subject in augmentation in the soprano he brings it
simultaneously in the tenor in its normal note values. By this
time he has contrived strettos at nearly every possible time interval—after one, two, four, ﬁve, and six beats. Think of this combination of subject and augmentation as yet another stretto of a
sort, a stretto at time-interval zero, after no beats at all.
Not only this: the subject-augmentation combination is further overlaid by the countersubject, returning after an absence of
twenty bars, reminding us at the end of the fugue of the end of
the chorale, and creating a sublime clockwork of continuous
eighth notes geared to the characteristic quarter-note motion,
geared in turn to the half-note master meter of the new augmentation. Instead of increasing the density of the original rhythmic layering of quarter notes and eighths, the terminal extra
layer seems to clear it up and makes it lucid. The countersubject
reasserts itself in one form or another (sometimes, of course, in

Fugue on “Jesus Christus unser Heiland” / 93

inversion) in almost every bar of the augmented entry. Bar by
bar—this is the same frequency as in the beautiful central
episode.
The whole is whitened. Sixteenth notes are leached out of the
texture. The music repeats itself like a mantra. And the evaporation process at the very end—the cadence glimmering away as
in a dust cloud—has to count as the last striking event in this
strikingly eventful fugue. We are not usually asked to track so
many changes of mood in a fugue; the process here is fascinating,
dizzying. After all of the changing the music ends with transcendence. I glimpse in our fugue a not-arbitrary series of what
Robert Schumann called Seelenzuständen—“soul conditions”:
The soul in torment . . . andante e mesto
Anguished transformations . . . sempre più mesto
A vision of grace . . . tranquillo subito
Rejection: fantasies, frenzies . . . un poco agitato, quasi scherzando
(ma in tempo)
Resolution: sublimation and release . . . calmo e semplice
A ﬁnal note: it is interesting that “Jesus Christus unser Heiland,”
the most distressed of all the sixteen chorale settings in
Clavierübung, book 3, seems so far in sentiment from the hymn
it ostensibly glosses. The words of this Communion hymn are
didactic, not affective. Only one of its seven stanzas has been
offered, without too much conviction, as an incentive toward
Dufourcq’s “tormented chromaticism”: stanza 2, paraphrasing
Jesus’ words in the Gospel of St. Matthew about the bread and
wine—“take, eat, this is my body” and “this is my blood of the
New Testament.”
But when Bach wrote his Passion According to St. Matthew,

94 / Fugue on “Jesus Christus unser Heiland”

it was typically the torment of the soul that incited distress, in
arias such as “Buß und Reu” and “Erbarme dich,” not the
Eucharist. He greeted the Last Supper with conﬁdence and a
special, simple beauty, in the bass arioso “Nehmet, esset; das ist
mein Leib.”

chapter 11

Fugue in F-sharp Minor
The Well-Tempered Clavier, Book 1

This fugue stands out among Bach’s more celebrated affettuoso
fugues in F-sharp minor and related keys, such as the imposing
Fugue in B Minor later in The Well-Tempered Clavier and both
Kyries from the Mass in B Minor, for its immediacy as well as its
brevity. The countersubject with its ceaselessly sobbing ﬁgure
has reminded many—indeed, most—commentators of the chorus “O Mensch bewein’ dein’ Sünde groß” from the St. Matthew
Passion, and the chromatically tinged subject too practically cries
out for words, words in the affective poetic language of Bach’s
cantata librettists Salomo Franck, Marianne von Ziegler, or
Picander. The inching upward and falling back of the melodic
line could paint the Christian soul in the toils of sin, or Christ
Himself bearing the cross.
Was there ever a moment when this subject matter couldn’t
make up its mind whether it wanted to be a fugue or a da capo
aria in some anguished cantata? For this “beautiful and haunting work,” as Laurence Dreyfus calls it, also troubles him, as it
has others, on account of anomalous or at least unusual features.
95

96 / Fugue in F-sharp Minor

The pathos comes very largely—though not exclusively, as I
hope I can show—from the powerful affect of the basic material;
the sobbing of the countersubject persists even when the subject
is inverted. Apart from this inversion, the fugue makes use of no
fugal device or artiﬁce. A beautiful stretto that starts in bar 22
fades almost immediately (and a possible exact inversion of the
countersubject is never actuated).
The music does not modulate, except to the obligatory dominant key, C-sharp minor—an unusual if not an isolated circumstance for this composer. The mediant, A major, which one
would also think obligatory, is just barely acknowledged [bar
15]; major-mode sonorities are in very short supply. This makes
for a profound austerity, to which a few short episodes, using
mostly the same material, offer a little mitigation, even though
that material derives, as usual, from the subject. It is as though
having invented the most emotion-drenched subject/countersubject unit he could, Bach wanted to see if he could sustain a
fugue with nothing else.
Not quite nothing else: if he draws very little on contrapuntal
resources, he manipulates texture as a way of shaping the musical discourse. A distinct textural change divides the composition
in three. Trio texture, with a “walking” bass a good distance
below only two upper top voices, distinguishes a middle section
or middle phase of the piece occupying a higher range than the
others [bars 20–27]. It is demarcated on both sides by similar
cadences in the dominant key, C-sharp minor.

First Phase: Bars 1–20
The opening exposition takes up almost half of this fugue; we
should track it closely.

Fugue in F-sharp Minor / 97

.

.

.

Bars 1–7: The basic material seems especially painful because it
moves haltingly; the unexpected pause on note 3 makes the following three-note figure falter or stumble. (The long note 3
receives royal treatment later.) Then the subject simply stops,
leaving the space between subject and answer unmediated: a
strangely sedative gesture, again very unusual in terms of fugal
practice.
The countersubject, beginning with what amounts to a broken inversion of the subject—a forecast of the strict inversion
that will materialize, and a hint of the stretto that will not—proceeds with a scale extending the subject’s most decided move,
eighth notes curling up through a fourth to the peak note C∏;
the scale goes up to D∏. Another fourth, not a scale but a slower
leap near the cadence, works to balance the continual stepwise
motion.
The ﬁrst episode, ﬂeeting as it may be, ventures up into a
pitch region that has previously been denied to this constrained
subject. It reaches the pitch B—a small message of consolation or
hope, perhaps. If so it is dashed by the sobbing motif that takes
over and drifts down, and down, into the third entry.
Bars 8–11: The third entry develops a second countersubject, at
ﬁrst subsidiary, yet strong enough to surge over the other voices
[bar 10]; it surges even more richly the next time [18]. The second episode starts with the same upward-curling ﬁgure as the
ﬁrst, but now without the sense of upward liberation. We do not
even reach B this time, and C∏ is still some way in the future. We
have to wait a considerable time for the next entry.
Bars 12–18: This appears on the tonic, rather than on the dominant as anticipated, and as Roger Bullivant observes, given the
long delay it sounds less like the completion of a four-part exposition than a new departure—a new exposition, with an extra
voice added to the three we already know about. (We were not
necessarily expecting a fourth voice, after all. The Prelude is for
three.) Perhaps Bach chose the tonic to avoid invading the space
above high C∏, where the more usual dominant entry would
have taken him, and to allow the subject to stand out, in the
soprano, yet also stay low, so as to set off the central trio section,
which lies conspicuously higher. Besides the delay and the tex-

98 / Fugue in F-sharp Minor

ture, this entry owes its climactic effect to the range—low as it is,
it touches the highest pitches heard so far—and to rich doublings of fragments from both countersubjects, at the tenth and
the sixth. The end of the second countersubject guides in the
low cadence [bar 18].

Second Phase: Bars 20–28
There is a sense of release as the soprano moves even higher and
the texture thins and widens, leading to a more decisive cadence
in bar 20. The subject appears again, in inversion—an inversion
the composer appears to have obscured deliberately, by means of
a faster, more articulate line above it. At all events it is easy to
miss.
In the soprano entry (recto) that comes next, the walking bass
of the trio texture unwinds to provide an interesting, almost
bright new perspective on the fugal material [bars 26–28]. Bach
obscures the opening of this recto statement too, this time melodically rather than contrapuntally.

Third Phase: Bars 28–40
Phase 1 of the fugue moved to an expressive climax in its last,
four-part entry. Broadly recapitulatory in quality, phase 3
resumes this process, building up to a level of pathos—we can
indeed speak of passion—well in excess of the promise even of
this fugue’s highly charged subject matter.
On the matter of sectionalization: admittedly, the break
between what I am calling phases 2 and 3 of the Fugue in Fsharp Minor is fuzzier than that between 1 and 2. Busoni, for
one, heard the work as a two-part structure and railed against the

Fugue in F-sharp Minor / 99

idea of a three-part division. My phase 3, with its ﬁrst subject
entry still in three voices, and with the soprano still in the same
high range as in the trio—even higher, one could say—can seem
like a continuation of phase 2. However, that subject entry (in the
tenor) returns to the tonic, after clear cadential articulation [bar
28]. Phase 1 of the fugue has three of its four entries starting on
the tonic, both entries of phase 2 start on the dominant, and
phase 3 has all three of its entries on the tonic.
Leaps of a fourth emerge around the tenor entry of bars 29–
32 and multiply around the bass entry that follows directly—
another inverted entry, now in four parts, and still in the tonic
[bars 32–35]. This inversion no one will miss; an outer voice, the
bass, tenders the subject unequivocally. (Was the earlier inverted
entry muted so that this one would speak more eloquently?
Whereas in the recto subject a single harmony underpins notes
1–3, in the inversion that critical note 3 acquires an affective
new harmony.) It is a moment of high pathos, with the bass
tracking the beginning of the soprano’s winding descent to the
ﬁnal cadence.
An inverted “answer” on the tonic—that certainly breaks textbook rules for a fugal answer. Yet this indeed feels like an answer
in a nontechnical sense, a subdued but entirely alert response to
the recto, a response that deepens dialogue. Hugo Riemann spoke
of “a greater inwardness, a deeper sinking into self.”
Bach has raised the emotional stakes here and still holds a
king and an ace at the ready. More fourth leaps lead into a particularly plangent circle-of-ﬁfths sequence, gleaming with majormode sonorities [bars 35–36]. The sobbing of the softly touching
lines is relieved by the doubling in tenths and sixths; this resource
was employed before, as we have seen, but never so expressively.

100 / Fugue in F-sharp Minor

There is a special poignancy to major-mode chords—B, E, A,
and D major, never presented quite explicitly—in a work that
has rationed them until now. As this ﬁnal episode ends—after
only two and a half bars, though its shadow haunts bars 37–
40—its offer of alleviation is trumped by an extraordinary augmented chord C∏ E∏ Aπ in the ﬁnal subject entry. This chord
reharmonizes note 3 once again, now over a dominant pedal [bar
37]. Dissonant, wrenching moments are not all that rare near the
ends of Bach pieces, but this one bites harder than most.
By bringing the subject at the same pitch level, the ﬁnal entry
recapitulates the exposition’s fourth entry. More broadly, the
three tonic entries in bars 28–40 recapitulate the entire tonicweighted exposition, bars 1–20. The ﬁnal tierce de Picardie is one
of Bach’s most beautiful.
So I do not agree with Laurence Dreyfus that this fugue “seems
to suggest a relatively static rather than dynamic reading,” and
that for Bach
it was the number and quality of inventions that he could
coax from his materials rather than their exhibited sequence
that counted. For this reason, it is more compelling to hear
the piece as a logical succession of paradigmatic changes
rather than syntagmatic causalities: chains of metaphors
rather than metonymies, as it were.

Indeed I ﬁnd it hard to distinguish my clear sense of the sequence
exhibited in this piece from its emotional immediacy. Baroque
composers depict the passions, Romantic composers express
them—this was a fairly common formulation before the concept
of expression had taken a beating from recent aesthetic philosophers. Expression is more likely to be located now in the lis-

Fugue in F-sharp Minor / 101

tener’s ear rather than in the composer’s pen, let alone his heart.
So be it—for this listener there is an unmediated quality to this
music, an intimation of the personal and the private that is
unusual in Baroque music. The material itself has much to do
with this quality but so also does the way the material is deployed
in time.
In both Kyries of the B-Minor Mass, communal passion,
communal pathos is distanced—as is of course entirely appropriate—and in the B-Minor Fugue from The Well-Tempered
Clavier, book 1, what seems like personal pathos is theatricalized. These are grand, elaborate compositions, far overshadowing the terse, almost minimal Fugue in F-sharp Minor. That
very terseness empowers special expressive immediacy.

chapter 12

Gigue
English Suite no. 3 in G Minor

The characteristic Bach gigue can be considered (that is, heard)
as a special type of fugue in a strictly prescribed, hypersymmetrical binary form—hypersymmetrical because these fugues come
to a dead stop in the middle, allowing for an exact repetition of
each of the two sections, or strains. Such gigues make very satisfying endings for about half of Bach’s keyboard suites, the
English Suites, the French Suites, and the Partitas, which also
include some terminal gigues of a different, nonfugal type.
All but one of the fugal gigues are written for three voices,
though they often use the full texture for the subject entries and
drop the third voice soon afterward. These are dance-music
pieces, the last and fastest members of the suites they belong to—
too fast to allow for much maneuvering with three contrapuntal
voices. Even in works that keep the texture full throughout, the
counterpoint is usually just a tad informal.
As to harmony, modulation is not a resource much drawn
on, presumably because binary form imposes its own tonic-to103

104 / Gigue

dominant-to-tonic axis so monolithically. As a rule these fugues
present entries in no more than three different keys, only occasionally four.

First Strain: Bars 1–20
The subject of the Gigue from English Suite no. 3 stands out for
its élan, even among the high-spirited company of gigues in
Bach’s suites and those of his contemporaries. Its free fall through
the interval of a twelfth is broken by sudden jerks, making for a
humorous ending at a point where many fugue subjects lapse
into convention.
The episodes are particularly imaginative in this gigue—past
a couple of less than remarkable ones at the start [bars 5–6, 8–11].
The heavy half cadence after episode 2 bisects the ﬁrst strain of
the gigue, stressing the overall symmetry and highlighting the
one mid-strain subject entry [bars 12–13]. Episode 3 is a composite lasting for ﬁve bars (that is, for a quarter of the strain). Its
ﬁrst, sequential segment [bars 13–15] introduces a cross-rhythm
that knocks the strong beat from note 1 of the 128 bars to note 7.
Thus the episode’s second segment—built on a powerfully measured upward scale from low A in the left hand—comes in a displaced meter, which the rhythmicized step up from C∏ to D in
the left hand conﬁrms with an irresistible swing [bar 17]. The
point of this new metrical arrangement is to reverse accents in the
subject when Bach retrieves it for use at the central cadence,
where it reaches the dominant key in the middle of bar 20, making this an effective downbeat. The effect is paradoxical—less
like a witticism, perhaps, than a conjuring trick.
A common, almost a deﬁning feature of pieces in binary form

Gigue / 105

is the use of a highly characteristic cadential phrase for each of
their strains, to hammer home the binary symmetry. (The WellTempered Clavier exempliﬁes this in a dozen preludes and even
one fugue, B-ﬂat Major in book 2: see page 126.) Bach sometimes
generates these cadential phrases out of the opening material,
modified in some interesting way. Here the opening subject
returns at the end of strain 1 newly invigorated, by means of
note-against-note two-part counterpoint, and it performs its
cadence on the newly established downbeat with the greatest of
aplomb. There is a smell of burning rubber when the music
stops.

Second Strain: Bars 21–44
The second strain of the G Minor Gigue tracks the ﬁrst closely.
(The main differences are the lack of a central half cadence and
the presence of two mid-strain subject entries rather than one.)
As in nearly all gigues, the second strain presents the subject in
inversion, and as is often the case, this causes just a little awkwardness in the melody, for when the inverted subject curls
down to the third degree (B∫) in bar 22 it wants to keep moving
down, not up to C. Bach does not shirk the problem but ﬁxes it
by modifying the subject so that it sails up to the ﬁfth degree (G,
in a subdominant entry) [bars 32–33]. The modiﬁed subject initiates a relatively spacious, even grand descent in episode 6 [33–
34]. While this may be a hectic piece, it does have its checks and
balances.
We can expect some of the episodes in strain 2 of the gigue to
recapitulate matter from strain 1, transposed down a ﬁfth, but
the smaller episodes are new. Only the corresponding composite

106 / Gigue

episode 7 [bars 36–41] looks back to episode 3. Bypassing the
disruptive beginning segment with the cross-accents, it extends
that highly kinetic upward scale in the left hand beyond belief.
The original parade of quarter notes, A B | C∏ - - - D E | F G (A),
now gets extra cohorts: G <| E F∏ G A | B∫ C marching up into
D E | F∏ - - - G A | B∫ C D.
This unbelievably long climb has upset some listeners but
exhilarated others, who hear it as a spectacular augmentation of
the inverted subject, appreciate the interesting countermotion in
the right hand, and ﬁnd the hyperbolic linear energy a perfect
match for the explosive contrapuntal energy in the gigue’s concluding salvo. For what now ensues is unusually brilliant, even
by Bach’s standards. When the subject (still inverted) turns up
again to make the final cadence, it kicks off a new double
stretto—with the original recto version of the subject [bars 41–
43]. The recto entries are smartly tailored and unhampered by
extra counterpoints. The afterbeat to the cadence clicks in punctually as a token of symmetry between the strains, but this has
been symmetry with a difference.
(The idea of having the recto return in the second strain of a
gigue to invade the inversion’s space and effect a sort of recapitulation—this plays out in one or two other Bach examples. Bach
prepares for the return as early as episode 4 [bars 25–26], an
episode so tiny one would hardly distinguish it from the general
swirl if not for its inclusion of the characteristic upward-sixth
leap taken from the subject’s recto version. By this time the
episodes and everything else ought to be controlled by the inversion, not the recto, but the upward sixth picks up and distills
what is no doubt the most distinctive feature of the recto subject,
its humorous ending. Then in episode 5, when a small turning

Gigue / 107

figure slips down no fewer than nine steps in sequence, and
bathos threatens, the presence of the sixth leap turns bathos into
high comedy [bars 30–32]. The sixth-leap ﬁgure also starts off
episode 7 [36–37].)
All this analysis: yet this is a fugue for performance and display,
not a fugue for contemplation or study. As the culmination of
English Suite no. 3—a suite that counts among its movements a
brilliant concerto paraphrase calling for a two-manual harpsichord, a saraband with extravagant ornamentation, and a
favorite gavotte that would steal the show if left to its own
resources—this gigue has to dazzle and impress. Dance is of the
essence here: jig, saltarello, tarantella, not counterpoint. Its
hyperbinary form is arguably even more conducive to easy listening than that of the other dances of the suite that precede it.
It features the eighteenth-century equivalent of a conga line.
Bach can have it both ways.

chapter 13

Fugue in A-ﬂat Major
The Well-Tempered Clavier, Book 1

This fugue, among the more concise pieces in The Well-Tempered
Clavier, is much loved by players and admired in the literature,
though what seem to be its special, perhaps unique, features have
not been remarked on or discussed. One of these is the way the
answer in this fugue tends to cleave to the subject. As the piece
proceeds, one feels more and more that its basic material has to
be the subject together with its answer, which may be called the
“subject-pair”—the subject-pair, not the single subject. The linkage is a consequence of the “open” ending of the subject, on the
ﬁfth degree, E∫, rather than on the more stable and much more
common third degree or tonic, and of its rhythmic profile:
entirely even, up to the point where it is ﬁrmly end-stopped.
Bach is articulating an elemental, elementary rhythmic cliché:
Twinkle, twinkle, little star,
How I wonder what you are,

one and two and three and four—one and two and three and
four. True, the melodic contour of the subject ensures that it
109

110 / Fugue in A-ﬂat Major

doesn’t feel quite as jejune as that, only very simple. The wonder
is how in so short a time so much eloquence can be made to
emerge from such childlike beginnings. While the subject-pairs
may be rudimentary and identical in rhythm, they are not identical or altogether simple in pitch content. The pitch conﬁguration is modiﬁed so as to register distress [bars 17–19] or convey
different shades of quiet enthusiasm and release [23–25, 29–31]
or touch on real sorrow [27–29].
Emotional range is another special feature of this short composition, all the more remarkable because of the overall tone of
restraint.

First Phase: Bars 1–23
The ﬂowing sixteenth-note ﬁgures of this fugue, which contrast
with the more slowly ﬂowing subject, are worth some close attention. They come in many slightly different patterns, culminating
in the bass of the recurring episode ﬁrst heard in bars 11–13. At
their first appearance in bars 2–3 these figures do not shape
themselves into a countersubject but propel the end of the answer
into a slightly awkward sequence: E∫>A∫ G E∫> C A∫ | B∫
∫ E∫>B∫ G E∫>A∫ F | G. This is the one place in the fugue
where the subject-pair does not end-stop.
One would never guess the role destined for the pattern of sixteenths below the third entry, in the bass [bars 5–6]—until Bach
repeats it several more times in an episode, as though to establish
its bona ﬁdes as a latter-day countersubject [7–9]. It will track the
subject at bar 18 (in inversion) and then in bars 23, 24, and 29.
After this repetitive, almost ruminative episode come three
parallel segments, each presenting a subject entry or subject-pair

Fugue in A-ﬂat Major / 111

leading to a new recurring episode, a ﬁlled-out version of the
sequence adumbrated in bar 3 [bars 10–13, 13–15, 17–20]. The
awkwardness has disappeared. The triple counterpoint appears
each time in different contrapuntal inversions, and one could
hardly ﬁnd a better instance to illustrate the expressive power of
this device. Hugo Riemann observed that these episodes do not
feel like “independent, real ‘between’ members in the period
structure,” as is generally the case in fugues, but like essential
completions or fulﬁllments (Vollziehungen) of the entries themselves. Tovey went so far as to declare the episodes, not the subject entries, the most important events in this composition.
At least to some extent, these responses must be due to the
episode’s intrinsic beauty. Although utterly simple in harmony—
it moves around the circle of ﬁfths with the usual standard suspensions—the detailing is exquisite: the ﬂickers of dissonance
caused by échappée notes such as the C at the end of bar 11, and
the momentary lift caused by the pair of sixteenth notes in bar 20.
The entries that are “fulﬁlled” by this recurring episode come
ﬁrst on the tonic, then on the submediant (F minor), and then on
the supertonic (B-ﬂat minor, answered by another entry conﬁrming that key). This is the area in the fugue that modulates,
then, introducing minor-mode sonorities made sumptuous by
the four-part writing. A strong cadence in the dominant, E ﬂat
major, is guided in by the suggestion of another entry, in the
alto, with a feint at stretto in the soprano [bars 21–23]. It is more
than a suggestion; one can hear the whole subject, extended so as
to reach a ﬁrm close, as though the notation were as shown in
example 17. Compare bars 33–35; the Fugue in A-ﬂat is actually
a camouﬂaged member of the family of fugal compositions evoking the binary structure of dance form. We have met or will

112 / Fugue in A-ﬂat Major
Example 17

22

meet several of these family members: the Fughetta in C, BWV
952, the G-Minor Gigue, and the Fugue in B-ﬂat Major from
book 2 of the WTC.
[Example17]

Second Phase: Bars 23–35
After this strong, form-deﬁning cadence, the fugue opens up
onto a serene, drawn-out plateau, a sort of diffused and moderated area of climax. Again, this is a feature that seems special to
this composition.
The new subject-pairs ﬂow into new episodes, just as brief as
the previous recurring episode and just as articulate and integral.
In bars 23–25 the subject itself changes in two seemingly contradictory ways. Melodically it expands, as the interval of a sixth
(the key interval that furnished the melody with its peak)
stretches to a seventh, while harmonically it contracts, since the
melodic change allows a single dominant-seventh chord to
underpin every beat until the last. Contrapunctus 4 in The Art of
Fugue includes a memorable similar case, though in that case
the thematic expansion of a sixth to a seventh promotes a dramatic intensiﬁcation of harmony. In the Fugue in A-ﬂat the subject-pair does not register drama at this point but liberation, new
lyricism, and grace. David Ledbetter calls the subject of this
fugue “lovable”; it is never more lovable than here.

Fugue in A-ﬂat Major / 113

The next fulﬁlling episode resembles the previous ones in some
ways, but unlike them, it cannot be imagined in contrapuntal
inversion, with the original soprano line half-hidden away in the
lower voices. This episode celebrates melody, escalating melody,
almost “unending melody” in Wagner’s sense. It eases the melodic
line downward from the expansive soprano entry in bar 24 with
wonderfully mellow arabesques and then goes on to initiate
another, second linear descent, over the next entries [bars 27–30].
The last two subject-pairs join to form a full, and therefore
quietly climactic exposition of the fugue’s four voices. The steady
pulsation works its way up ceremoniously and radiantly through
the bass, tenor, alto, and soprano to join the overarching soprano
melody. The soprano entry is the highest yet, and the arabesques,
inverted, mount higher still, outdoing themselves in eloquence,
then becoming a chain of descending thirds (A∫ F D∫ B∫ G):
music for a benediction [bar 32]. When the soprano moves down
again the childlike rhythm breaks:
Twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, little star
You are.

The upper voices have been coalescing into rather grand chords.
At the very end the ﬂowing sixteenth notes in the bass shape
themselves into a distinctive ﬁgure—the expressive ﬁgure from
the recurring episode, the figure with the dissonant échappée
[bars 34, 35]. The fugue ends by “rhyming” with its central
cadence, enhanced by this new reminiscence, spoken in an
undertone: restrained, like all the rest of the music, but telling.
From the diaries of Cosima Wagner we know that late in his life
Richard Wagner admired Bach and especially The WellTempered Clavier. “The quintessence of Bach,” he called it, com-

114 / Fugue in A-ﬂat Major

paring the fugues to “the roots of words . . . in relation to other
music it is like Sanskrit to other languages.”
One winter a fabulous series of soirées at Haus Wahnfried, the
Wagner mansion in Bayreuth, was given over to the whole of the
WTC, six preludes and fugues per evening, with Josef Rubinstein
and Liszt playing and Wagner holding forth. “R. describes the
17th fugue [A-ﬂat Major] as a dance, and traces a few steps to
the ﬁrst bars, then says it is freer in form, already approaching the
sonata,” Cosima writes. This seems a little off for our fugue—
Cosima may have confused the number. But another of her
comments, “R. cannot praise highly enough the remarkable
singing quality of the ﬁgurations,” referring to the WTC in general, might have been prompted by the sixteenth-note ﬁgures of
the Fugue in A-ﬂat Major.
(Wagner specifically related his “unending melody” to
another WTC fugue, the Fugue in F-sharp Minor from book 2.
An essay by Christian Thorau discusses the aptness of this choice
at length.)

chapter 14

Fugue in A Minor
Fantasy and Fugue in A Minor, BWV 904

Where to start is with two pages at the center of the Fugue in A
Minor—the essential pages, containing a second, free fugue
within the three-part sectional form (A B A'). In section 3 of the
work, A', new themes developed in section 2 will combine with
the subject of section 1.
This central fugue circulates a familiar-sounding chromatic
subject twice through each of the four voices. This seems a better way of describing the overall plan than to speak of two (irregular) four-part expositions, for the entries all come in pairs—
with substantial and specially important episodes between them;
the motif of the ﬁrst of these episodes is worked into a freely varied countersubject. And the time interval between entries
expands from two beats in the ﬁrst pair of entries, which therefore counts as a close stretto between bass and alto [bars 37–39],
to four beats—one bar—in the second pair [41–44], a bar and a
half in the third [48–51], and two bars in the fourth and last
[55–59].
115

116 / Fugue in A Minor

Clearly this music’s almost surplus expressivity has not been
achieved at the expense of systematic thinking. Bach does not
employ system for system’s sake, however, at least not here. The
result of the time interval’s expanding (or, looked at another way,
the stretto’s unwinding) is that we get a bigger allotment of
descending semitones each time. They soon become hypnotic.
The episodes are specially important because of the essentially
neutral affect of the main, chromatic theme itself (which I am
happier calling “theme,” rather than “subject”; it lacks the
cogency of a typical Bach subject, even though it can serve as such
in a subsidiary capacity). Anyone’s instinctive response to this
pattern of slow descending semitones will probably be to lament
along with them, as we do with Dido’s Lament in Purcell’s Dido
and Aeneas, the Cruciﬁxus in Bach’s Mass in B Minor, and any
number of other unforgettable moments in opera, church music,
and the repertory of organ chorales.
But in fact this chromatic pattern also turns up again and
again in Baroque music not associated with any text, so much
so that it counts as one of the era’s insistent clichés. The Bach
scholar Peter Williams, who has written a whole book on the
history of The Chromatic Fourth, from Cipriano de Rore and
William Byrd to Bartók and Stravinsky, cites its appearance in
about fifty instrumental works by Bach. (And he must have
chosen his examples from among many more, since the Fantasy
and Fugue in A Minor is not among them.) Whether composers meant to evoke the affect of lament in the many instrumental fugues that use the chromatic fourth as a subject, countersubject, or subsidiary subject, is a real question. Williams
thinks not.
Some of these fugues are certainly quite dry. However, the

Fugue in A Minor / 117

accents of lament must always be at least latent in the chromatic
subjects, always open to the possibility of activation by means of
some further musical parameter or device. Here this function is
ﬁlled by the one-bar motif introduced in the ﬁrst episode [bar 39].
Its anapest rhythm and its syncopation survive through an almost
unthinkable diversity of variations, the variants becoming more
and more expressive and even more hypnotic than the descending semitones.
This music lives on its wealth of exquisite detail, for which no
level of sensitivity can be too hyper. At the keyboard one follows
it fascinated—in my case, I have to say, with a keyed-up mixture
of feelings like delight, admiration, and apprehension. Things
are harder at the word processor, frequent raids on the thesaurus
key alt–f1 notwithstanding. With music of this kind we really
have to go bar by bar, beat by fascinating beat.

Fugue 2: Bars 36–60
The new fugue begins directly after the ﬁnal entry of the original subject [bars 33–36], the subject of fugue 1 (fugue 1 is discussed below).

.

Bars 36–38: The rhythmic transition here is very striking. When
the sixteenth-note motion tapers off into quarters (articulated as
a heavy staccato) there is a feeling of uncertainty that deepens
with the slack appoggiatura D–C (not D–C∏) in the alto. The
cadence seems unsure of its own ﬁnality, as though sensing something untoward ahead in the stretto’s tread of unvarying quarter
notes. There are as many as nine of these quarters in all.
Bars 39–41: The pace has to pick up again, and when it does the
rhythm of the all-important new motif too is uncertain, or at
least halting (see example 18a). As the motif begins to probe chrom]–[Example18

.

118 / Fugue in A Minor
Example 18
a.

b.
40

d.

c.

e.

43

48

f.
49

50

g.
51

h.

52

i.

53

j.

54

k.
55

l.
56

57

m.
58

59

matic space, we can also hear it as vulnerable and wary. The
peak note of its anapest ﬁgure is nearly always hit by a dissonance
caused by the surrounding counterpoint (at its ﬁrst appearance,
D∏ in the alto makes a dissonance with C in the bass). Often, as
here, the dissonance or its impression lingers on, delaying its resolution until the last moment.

Fugue in A Minor / 119

.

.
.

.

.

Bars 41–43: Manipulating the motif into a countersubject to the
chromatic theme becomes a very delicate procedure. Bach ﬁrst
tests the waters with just the motif ’s ending ﬁgure. He adds the
rest of it almost covertly, on a weak beat (example 18b), though
the material gains conﬁdence (and credibility as a countersubject)
inasmuch as the motif now appears as a sequence drawn out as a
melodic line in a single voice, rather than shared between imitating voices.
Bar 43: A new arpeggio figure eases the motif over onto the
strong beat; as happens almost routinely in this music, one idea
ﬂows into another seamlessly and with the greatest eloquence
(example 18c).
Bars 44–47: Fugue 2 is laid out symmetrically or systematically,
at least for a while, with episodes of the same sort after the ﬁrst
and second pairs of entries (though the latter is in three parts and
is extended) [bars 41–43, 44–47]. If the motif seemed (to me)
fearful before, now its worst fears have been realized and it settles into varieties of plaint or lament. This affective posture
matches the aptitude of the chromatic theme only too well.
Again the motif gains coherence when its sequences run
together in a single voice, and urgency as well, for the voice is the
soprano and this has moved up rather suddenly to high C. The
descent is slow.
Bar 47: Bach also plays with the eighth-note figure from the
episodes, drawing a burst of emotion from it in a truly vertiginous transformation (example 18d). One can hear this cry in the
tenor as an anticipation of a whole series of such transformations coming up in the soprano.
Bars 48–50: Few bars in the whole of this work depart from the
minor mode—only two bars in fugue 1 and two in fugue 2. The
present entries in C and G major cloud major modality with
minor-mode nuance and ambivalent dissonances.
Above these entries the variants of the motif sound to me
more than plaintive, they sound excruciating; the sixteenth-note
anapest ﬁgure originally heard as step> step> (A–B–C), treated
to some kind of out-of-control inversion process, shatters into

120 / Fugue in A Minor

.

.

.

.

more extreme ﬁgures: ﬁrst diminished 5th< step>, then its distorting-mirror image diminished 5th> step<, minor 6th< step>,
and ﬁnally a piercing minor 7th< step> (example 18e).
Bars 51–53: This very fraught passage needs relief and gets it,
from a fresh episode using the basic material in mild ways (example 18f). There are still descending semitones in the upper voices
but never two in a row, and the version of the motif low down in
the bass feels open and kinetic. After a few leaps and bounds this
version converts back into the original motif, at its original register—another seamless, eloquent transition (example 18g).
Bars 53–54: Once back to its natural habitat in the alto-soprano
range, the motif is ready to mutate again. A simple, soft variant
slips down—by this time we are listening to every heartbeat—
into a beautifully molded half cadence (example 18h) and then
slips up again, in a sort of pensive rebound (example 18i). The
soprano waits for the alto to join it on the note B (example 18j).
The alto itself waits for another lingering resolution. The music
is waiting for the ﬁnal pair of entries, a tenor-soprano pair that
will form the climax to this section of the fugue.
Bars 54–59: This climax employs another expressive variant of
the motif, which in the ﬁrst entry of the pair comes at the interval of an augmented fourth above the chromatic theme, on the
weak beat (example 18k), and in the second entry a major sixth
below it, on the strong beat (example 18l).
Ever-new wrenching dissonances are the outcome of this
technical tour de force. Each of the two entries gets special
enhancement: the ﬁrst of them is supported by the lowest pitches
so far, led into by a marvelous leap in the left hand down from
high to low E. The whole bass line pulses with new resonance.
The second entry draws on the full four-part texture for the ﬁrst
time . . . and brings a (more or less) new rhythmic ﬁgure in the
tenor, expressive to the last . . .
Bars 59–60: Can we really keep up with all this, and thrill to it?
Although the themes remain at work after what is really the
final cadence, in bar 56, they are now more transparent than
expressive. A “cleared-up” variant of the motif over a de facto

Fugue in A Minor / 121

dominant pedal makes a perfectly paced transition back to fugue
1 (example 18m—a quite remote variant, though bar 53 offers a
precedent). Bach writes a simple little stretto here, as a farewell
to a motif in the process of (temporary) liquidation.
The dissonances are still there, defanged. The chromatic fourth
withdraws to the emotional neutrality that Peter Williams says is
its normal condition in instrumental writing of the Baroque.

Fugue 1: Bars 1–36
Sir Hubert Parry called the Fugue in A Minor “one of Bach’s
very ﬁnest fugues”—and has been criticized for it. (Parry wrote
one of three major studies of the composer that came out almost
at the same time, in 1905–9, the ﬁrst of any consequence since
Philipp Spitta’s foundational study of thirty years earlier. The
others were by Albert Schweitzer and the French musicologist
André Pirro.) Of course I agree with Parry.
But even Parry would not have called this music consistently
very fine. The awkwardness of the first subject comes into focus
if it is compared to a sample from The Well-Tempered Clavier
similar to it in contour (see example 19): too many heavy beats,
too many As and Ds, and the diminution in bar 7 is too obvious.
The comparison makes one wonder, incidentally, how later
authorities can rest easy with a date as late as 1725 for this
music. They have built a good case that the Fugue in A Minor
and the Fantasy—a superb extended essay in concerto form—
were not written together as a pair and probably not brought
together by the composer; whether the fugue’s three sections in
their present form were written together as late as 1725 has not
been investigated.
Other weaknesses show up in section 1—as well as more ﬁne

122 / Fugue in A Minor
Example 19
a. Fugue in A Minor, BWV 904 (answer)
6

b. Fugue in F-sharp Minor, WTC, book 2 (answer, transposed)
5

things for Parry to admire, starting with the link between the
opening entry and the answer. After the subject’s prolix ending,
any composer would probably want to move upward with some
vigor, but to run (or race) its characteristic interval of a minor
sixth up to the top of the keyboard and hang there—that could
not have been predicted. This haunting sound never recurs.
The lack of a real countersubject allows for new harmonies at
later entries, as well as varied counterpoints; bars 25–28 are particularly rich. An episode working through some major keys
makes an energetic foil to the main material [bars 29–32]. It combines the end of the subject with parts of the link and returns
expertly modiﬁed so as to ﬁt the deepening sobriety—gloom, we
may as well call it—that settles in on the fugue’s last page [bars
71–74].
This music is monolithic; fugue 1 might be picked out to
exemplify the world of the Baroque, the world Bach knew in his
early years, while fugue 2 looks forward to the music of sensibility, the empﬁndsamer Stil of a younger generation. Here the music
is constantly evolving. Its emotion is nursed within; if fugue 2
laments, it does so alone in a private space, not communally at
any kind of public ritual. Fugue 1 is severe, rhetorical, admoni-

Fugue in A Minor / 123

tory. The voice may be hoarse, but the lesson is momentous. One
fugue suffers, the other sermonizes.

The Fugue Subjects Combined: Bars 61–80
In no other fugue of this type does Bach draw so extreme a contrast between sections (allowing for one equivocal exception: the
unﬁnished Contrapunctus 14 in The Art of Fugue). How does he
accommodate the contrasted worlds of section 1 and section 2 in
section 3? Through melody and harmony, rather than counterpoint.
The combination of the three themes in triple counterpoint
works less well than one might have expected—less well, at least,
than I would have expected—for while the chromatic theme
does its job dependably in the wake of the main subject, the
expressive motif comes rather too late, and its initial launch in the
high register does not bear comparison with similar launches
earlier [bars 63, 43 and 53]. We also miss the tenor. But the motif
reaches a kind of apogee over the last stretto of the chromatic
theme, wedged in between entries of the main subject [bars 67–
68]. The two upper voices go high, entwine, fuse, and implode
into a de facto run of continuous sixteenth notes. The motif
seems to yearn as it disappears in a new liquidation.
And the big moment in section 3 comes at the encounter of
all the themes in the last of its three combined subject entries
[bars 74–78]. (The second of the combined entries, in shock from
the liquidation of the motif, leaves the motif out and uses only the
other two themes.) Clearly this is the rhetorical climax of the
whole composition. The original subject has been reharmonized
before, as we have seen, but never as drastically as here—the

124 / Fugue in A Minor

forthright subdominant on the third beat of bar 74, the ﬂicker of
modal harmony in the C-major chord on the fourth beat, and its
realization in the magniﬁcent low C three bars later. Bach’s homily comes through with unshakable authority.
Only after these moments have passed does the crucial motif
come into play, with a gesture that reclaims the subtlety of its
operations in fugue 2. It bonds quietly—so quietly that one
hardly notices—with shreds of the main fugue subject on the
way to the ﬁnal cadence [bars 78–80]. A melodic invention of the
simplest kind brings this fugue’s two opposite emotional worlds
into a ﬁnal equilibrium.

chapter 15

Fugue in B-ﬂat Major
The Well-Tempered Clavier, Book 2

Writing on the Fugue in B-ﬂat Major, Hermann Keller found
the countersubjects “handled in an indolent, almost casual manner, in no way disturbing the serene unconcern of this fugue.”
These adjectives work rather well for the character of the piece
in general, not only for the treatment of the countersubjects,
though it’s important to supplement them with another set of
adjectives, adjectives like artful, elegant, and sly. Keller says that
its performance should be “lightly animated, with grace and
some humor.” This work is one of Bach’s more subtle inventions—a light-hearted fugue for connoisseurs, we should probably acknowledge, one that also labors under a further handicap,
that of sharing space with one of the composer’s most radiant
(and longest) preludes.
Indolent: the lazy stream of sound begins with the fugue subject itself, a strictly continuous series of even notes in a moderate
tempo. In slow tempo, a continuously moving subject can make a
fugue sound grave and monumental (the Fugue in F Minor from
125

126 / Fugue in B-ﬂat Major
Example 20

The Well-Tempered Clavier, book 1), in fast tempo, brilliant (see
example 2, page 18), and in moderate tempo, gently somnolent.
The placid surface should not be allowed to hide the tough fugal
structure below and its sophisticated contrapuntal manipulations.
Sly: while this subject is decidedly anomalous in opening on a
pitch other than the tonic or the dominant—something that puts
every commentator on alert—in this rhythmic situation one
barely notices, so ﬂuent is the motion. And of course the off-thetonic, off-the-downbeat opening contributes to the fluency, a
point particularly evident if one compares this fugal opening, on
the supertonic, C, to the only other one in the WTC with a similar anomaly, F-sharp Major from book 2, with its zany trill on
the hypersensitive seventh degree (example 20).
But most sly and artful of all is the phrase leading to the very
strong cadence in the middle of this fugue—actually, not halfway through, more like a third [bars 29–32]. It is a phrase that
seems to have migrated from another sound world, another era.
More than one passage in the WTC shows Bach’s interest in the
music of sensibility, the empﬁndsamer Stil associated with his son
Carl Philipp Emanuel, which grew up as a reaction to perceived
severities of the Baroque. This is what Tovey had in mind when
he spoke of a “homophonic crotchet bass” in this phrase and said
it should be played “with the repeated notes nearly tied,” so as to
evoke the clavichord Bebung or vibrato effect favored by the
younger generation.
[Example20]

Fugue in B-ﬂat Major / 127

Instead of ﬂowing, the music here begins to slide, as though
the only-too-well-established eighth-note motion were imperiled by the diminished ﬁfth F<(D)<Bπ outlined by the bass [bars
28–29], and the voice now needed to stabilize itself by means of
steady quarter notes. Over this precarious-sounding foundation,
the upper voices—suddenly aerated by rests—continue on their
insouciant way, with a brisk little rhythmic snap in the soprano
[bar 31]. The alto voice compounds the problem with its A∫ and
then tries to put on the brakes with its long Eπ. There are spicy
harmonic details in bars 30 and 31: a progression from a diminished ﬁfth to an augmented fourth (B–F / B∫–E) and a dissonant
échappée note A.
No, what is most sly is how easily we find ourselves adjusting to the fugue’s basic fluent style when the unsettling moment
is past. We wonder whether we’ve been daydreaming. David
Schulenberg suggests that the cadence “sounds a little pat,
entering a bit too suddenly,” but I think not. The effect has
been anticipated, locally by the chromatic slippage in bars 26–
27, and by the extraordinary dropping out of the upper voices
in bar 28.
It has also been anticipated by broader rhythmic factors. With
so ﬂuent a gait, this music will either lull the listener into pleasant inattention or make her especially alert to the slightest rhythmic deviations. One call to attention is the syncopation followed
by a pair of eighth notes in bar 8; Riemann noted that this ﬁgure
blossoms in the fugue’s longest episode, some sixty bars later—a
reference that will give the specially alert listener special satisfaction. Another slight deviation is more immediate, the iambic
pattern (quarter note/half note) introduced as a rhythmic contrast in the ﬁrst episode. Bar 19 holds it in our memory, and it

128 / Fugue in B-ﬂat Major

slows the movement in bars 25–27 and 28. Bar 31 offers a
diminution, in that rhythmic snap. Artful again.
With so striking a central cadence, in the dominant, we know
that the same striking cadence will return at the end of the work,
transposed into the tonic. “Rhyming” cadences of this kind are a
feature of binary compositions and fugues that borrow from
them; see page 20.

Section 1: Bars 1–32
The structure of the subject allows for many subtleties. (Is it too
sly to suggest that the two motifs in it, presented in different
sorts of sequence, are making mild fun of standard Baroque ﬁgures for warfare and pathos, respectively?) Originally presented
in the conﬁguration a a b b, elsewhere the a and b motifs are
reconﬁgured. The pattern b a seems especially piquant at the big
cadences [bars 29–30, 90–91]. The pattern a b a b a b b will add
sinew to the fugue’s longest episode [69–75].
And bar 9 introduces a slight variant of a; it would be fussy to
distinguish this, if not for the fact that the inversion at the end of
the variant usually points in some interesting direction: a leap of
a ﬁfth, echoing the new ﬁfth in the answer [bars 9, 11], a downward seventh [12, 45], an unexpected A∫ [14], a sustained high
F [21].
Section 1 of the fugue is short, simple, and notably lucid. A lot
of space opens up between the bass and the upper voices. There
are only four subject entries, and the countersubjects could not be
simpler or more elegant. The one in the alto is little more than a
long sustained note, and the one in the soprano consists of a long
limping scale mirroring the ﬁrst half of the subject while dou-

Fugue in B-ﬂat Major / 129

bling the second half of the subject in tenths and sixths [bars 13–
17]. These primitive countersubjects invert neatly to the soprano
and alto respectively [21–24].

Section 2: Bars 32–93
After the fugue’s central cadence, combination of the subject
with new, contrasting counterpoints articulates the beginning of
a second section. They turn out to be true countersubjects, for
although after their ﬁrst appearance they tend to click in late—
almost casually, as Keller put it—they persist quite audibly for
many more entries and experience many more different inversions than do their opposite numbers in the fugue’s ﬁrst section.
(New—yet these countersubjects are also artfully linked to
earlier material:

.
.

.

The slow one, in the bass, augments the bass of the immediately
preceding cadence [bars 30–31, 32–36].
The other draws its syncopation and two-eighth-note figure
from bar 8. Its entire line, in fact, is foreshadowed in bars 6–9,
and what might be viewed as the fully realized form of this countersubject opens with the half-inverted variant of the ﬁrst motif
from bar 9 [40, 65].
At one point in section 2, Bach winks at section 1, where the
motif entered variously on the subject’s ﬁrst or second bar, by
bringing it on both the ﬁrst and the second bar of an entry [14,
21, 54–55].)

The texture now becomes markedly denser. Contrapuntal
inversions of the combined subject and countersubjects are
worked out in unusually fertile and elegant ways. By the time of
book 2 of the WTC, Bach was losing interest in those clearly

130 / Fugue in B-ﬂat Major

organized sequential episodes, designed to return in strict contrapuntal inversion, which play so large a role in book 1—starting
with the often-cited Fugue in C Minor. In the middle of the
present fugue, ﬁve separate subject entries are spaced out by transitional passages, none of which crystallizes out as a clearly
deﬁned unit, ringing endless changes on the thematic material
[bars 32–67].
This is rich fare and, dare I say, somewhat hard to digest. The
invention is fabulous, and the saturation impressive. But as the
subject drifts smoothly and systematically through many keys—
from B-ﬂat major to G minor, E-ﬂat major, and C minor—I
think Keller is right to ﬁnd something indolent in the regular
turnover of entries and spacing material, all at three-, four-, or
ﬁve-bar intervals—eight units, in all. I can sense a sort of generalized purposefulness at this point in the composition; I miss an
overall sense of purpose.
However this may be, this dense music provides a foil for
Bach’s next move: to bring the piece to an end with altogether
new expansiveness, and even a show of new power. The control
of pace here is as notable as the contrapuntal virtuosity in the previous bars. At this juncture Bach writes two longer phrases running into the “rhyming” cadence. The ﬁrst of them contains an
episode that is very well calculated, simple as it may look on the
page [bars 67–75]: the sheer length of it, relative to the rest of the
fugue, the contented rumble of the bass, released from its
involved contrapuntal transactions, and the familiar, friendly
circle-of-fifths harmonic progression—all this leads firmly,
broadly, and with a certain formality to a moment of rest on the
dominant.
Then the fugue takes a gulp of air before launching into the

Fugue in B-ﬂat Major / 131

ﬁnal subject entry, an answer starting from high G [bars 78–81].
The sense of new breadth is maintained beautifully, as the subject is now drawn out for longer than four bars. This is not the
ﬁrst time Bach has created this effect with this subject, but it is
especially striking on this occasion because the slow countersubject in the bass appears to slip out of synch and move ahead by
one bar, thus refusing to close off the subject. The subject also
refuses to close off itself, proliferating by means of a deliberate
sequence to a cadence in G minor. (Though to be sure, as this was
the key of the ﬁrst entry to move away from the tonic-dominant
sphere [bars 47–51], one could say that something has been closed
off, an area of modulation. G was the high note in bar 78.)
The creative energy seems limitless. In bar 86 the fugue’s signature motif a turns upward, through the lively interval of a
sixth, not downward as on all previous occasions. A single broken chord (see page 156) adds a moment of impulsive sparkle.
(Or does the token swelling of the texture here, prior to the
final cadence, “invert” the emptying of texture prior to the central cadence [bars 88, 27–28]? That would be sly.) From the
high G at the beginning of the last entry on, the wide-open texture characteristic of the fugue’s first section is restored and
underscored.
A metaphor claims precedence, insists on its prerogatives, will
not be hushed up. It ﬁgures our fugue as the outﬂow of a tiny
spring, an indolent trickle in a single voice. The music swells into
a stream, gathers volume, and ﬂows merrily (that’s the word)
before being dammed for a moment; that funky central cadence
behaves like a man-made barrier to the natural force of Baroque
polyphony. A sluice, perhaps, or a lock. Past this, the waters enter

132 / Fugue in B-ﬂat Major

into a stretch of tricky rapids, where they eddy and surge into
adjacent tonal territory. Then the stream, now a rivulet, runs
smoothly again, and in broader channels, opening upon what
has become an ample vista . . . until another, rhyming sluice completely stems the ﬂow and inundates the metaphor.

chapter 16

Fugue in B Major
The Well-Tempered Clavier, Book 2

An entrée to the Fugue in B Major, one of Bach’s most beautiful
fugues, can be gained from a composer who learned The WellTempered Clavier as a boy and at the end of his life found himself
drawing on it again and again. When Beethoven took the subject
of the B Major Fugue as the model for that of the Große Fuge, the
fugal ﬁnale of the Quartet no. 13 in B-ﬂat Major, Opus 130, he
turned Bach on his head. The upward corkscrew thrust of the
Große Fuge subject generates an emphatic climax, driven home
by a characteristic late-Beethoven trill (example 21).
Bach’s aesthetic does not allow for a climax of this boisterous
kind. Throughout the B Major Fugue one can see him working to tamp down excess energies inherent in the very unusual
trajectory of his material. A melody that moves up an octave,
from low tonic to high tonic, needs to recoup and find a safe
resting place. The special quality of this work comes from a
dialectic of aspiration and restraint, soaring upward and holding down.
b]–[Example21

133

134 / Fugue in B Major
Example 21
a. Beethoven, Große Fuge

b. Fugue in B Major, Well-Tempered Clavier, book 2

Thus in the opening exposition, the slow, measured tread of
the subject reaches up to its climax just in time to break off and
cede to a graceful tumble of shorter, weaker steps reclaiming the
entire octave. In addition, as soon as possible—that is, after the
ﬁrst subject/answer pair—Bach softens the next pair harmonically, by underpinning their peak notes with submediants (G∏
under B in bar 13, D∏ under F∏ in bar 17). The successive notes
of the subject, grouped as diads—B + D∏, E + G∏, A∏ + C∏—
form themselves into the cadential progression I–IV–V–I; in
bars 13 and 17 these cadences turn deceptive (I–IV–V–vi).
At this early point in the composition, Bach introduces the
softening notes in such a way as to cause the mildest of interruptions to the suave harmonic ﬂow—mild, though with a hint of
ceremony, even austerity. A little later, in the fugue’s second section, he brings the same subject/answer pair (same voices, same
pitch levels) and undercuts the peaks with the same submediants
[bars 38, 45]. Restraint of the climax now requires chromatic
alterations and diminished-seventh sounds. These obviously
foretell modulation. The different treatment of these submediants epitomizes the difference between the two sections of this
fugue—the ﬁrst ostensibly simple, the second obviously richer
and much more fully developed.

Fugue in B Major / 135

Section 1: Bars 1–27
In its sectional form, the Fugue in B Major resembles the Fugue
in B-ﬂat Major, a few pages earlier in the WTC, at least at ﬁrst
blush, but the differences between them are revealing. In B-ﬂat
Major, after the central cadence two serious countersubjects are
unleashed—adding up to three contrapuntal lines with just three
voices to cope with them. B Major deals its subject two countersubjects in section 1 but only one in section 2, an easy enough hand
for a composer with four voices at his disposal. No wonder (since
the composer is Bach) the piece can ﬂow in such effortless, stately
periods.
He designed the intricate patterns of the ﬁrst countersubject
to offset the explicit rhythmic and implicit harmonic simplicities
of the subject. It tracks the subject’s risky upward course, twining around it like a vine, then untwining and descending in the
closest conjunction with its sequel, so that the syncopations and
dissonances all drop away. This quite marvelous two-part counterpoint casts a pensive gray light evenly over the opening page,
as I hear it—pace Hugo Riemann, who admired the B-Major
Fugue for its contrasts, for the subject’s “steps of iron fate” and
the countersubject’s “passionate wringing of hands.” However
this may be or may be felt, the ﬁrst section of this fugue certainly
counts for a good deal more than a launching pad for the second.
Yet section 1 of the B-Major Fugue bests B-ﬂat Major for simplicity, with barely perceptible links between entries, rather than
episodes. (Note how smoothly Bach overlaps linking and episodic material with the upcoming entries, here and elsewhere.)
After the exposition the countersubject breaks free at last and
rises serenely to high G∏, the highest pitch yet [bar 21]. Two bars

136 / Fugue in B Major

later G∏ is touched again—as though to remind us of the sensitivity of this note within the original subject. Entry 5 opens into
a brief, relaxed passage preparing for the ﬁrst big cadence, where
a new ﬁgure appears in the lower voices—a softly-moving slow
trill [bars 22, 23, 24]. It is rather distinctive, and we will not miss
it when it returns.

Section 2: Bars 27–60
How fresh section 2 sounds; a gust of air blows through the texture as it starts, and the new countersubject (or second subject)
could not contrast with the ﬁrst more elegantly: ﬂowing rather
than spurting, headed down, not up, wide open, not entwined.
Introduced along with the main subject, it is in fact the typical
continuously moving member of Bach’s contrapuntal combinations, if more shapely than most because of its contour and the
syncopated braking at the end. Syncopation ties it in with the ﬁrst
countersubject, which it now completely displaces—lest there be
any mistake about this, the next few bars busy themselves with a
mini-exposition for the second subject all on its own.
This leads to an extended passage devoted to various thematic
combinations and modulations. The strong tonic peaks tend to
be softened, as we have seen; the submediant ploy makes for ﬂuidity and ease in modulation. Except for the way it ends, this passage resembles the corresponding passage (directly after the central cadence) in the Fugue in B-ﬂat Major, but things feel more
lucid here, due mainly, no doubt, to the distinction in material
between the episodes and the entries. All episodes (except the
last) employ the same idea, as in section 1, but here it is a subsidiary idea: an almost routine scale ﬁgure gliding up and down

Fugue in B Major / 137

the interval of a fourth in eighth notes. This ﬁgure can perhaps
be traced back to bars 22–24 (or even to bar 4), and it stays with
the piece until the ﬁnal cadence.
One entry stands out because the subject’s peak note is not
softened by undercutting of its tonic. Entry 9, in G-sharp minor,
proclaims its submediant tonality [bars 48–51]. Entry 11 will
proclaim submediant authority. After visiting the submediant
key twice we can hardly be surprised that this fugue will be even
more extensive, intricate, and magniﬁcent than at ﬁrst we would
have anticipated.

Bars 60–85
Hearty, almost Handelian right-hand chords prepare the important E-major cadence in bar 60. They may already warn of
bumps ahead in what has been a very smooth ride up to now.
Entry 11 suddenly claims a higher register, and a higher
adrenaline level: the soprano bursts in at the top of its range with
the countersubject a bar ahead of time (triggered by a ﬂashback
in the alto to the syncopations of the earlier countersubject: bars
60–64). The subject itself starts in E major but on G∏, so that it
ends in the submediant, for the second time, as already noted.
Now there is space for a substantial episode, at long last, moving
down, up—high up—and down again in three distinct segments [bars 63–74]. With a growing sense of exhilaration and
release, sixteenth notes and leaping dotted ﬁgures renew the aspiration inherent in the original subject.
Entry 12 [bars 75–78]: one can see why commentators refer to
a climax at this juncture—Schulenberg even speaks of a “sonatastyle return”—for both the tonic key and the four-part texture are

138 / Fugue in B Major
Example 22
D

75

B

G

G

restored, after a long absence (example 22). Yet again there is a
sense of restraint; this return is nothing like a Beethoven recapitulation. The tonic at bar 75 is prepared very weakly, and the commanding soprano line picks out notes of the submediant triad,
once again (D∏, B, G∏, D∏), rather than those of the tonic. The
energy generated by those submediant proclamations seems still
not to have dissipated. In fact G∏ receives its strongest articulation
yet within this very entry, appearing ﬁrst in the bass with the luminous support of a secondary dominant, a D-sharp-major chord
[bars 75–76], and then at the top of the soprano melody [77].
And G sharp seems still strong enough to deﬂect the harmony
back to its cohort, the mediant D-sharp minor, site of the next
strong cadence [bar 85]. In a strange way the tonic area of entry
12 feels like a parenthesis between the keys of G-sharp minor and
D-sharp minor to come, a major-mode area trapped between
two minor-mode ones. It is hard enough to describe what happens here in technical terms, let alone characterize the feeling:
stable and unstable, warm and distant, new and old—old, since
entry 12 resonates with another bass entry in the tonic, entry 5,
from the end of section 1 [bars 19–21]. The gliding scale ﬁgure
that was broached there emerges from the shadows for a gesture
of unexpected eloquence [bars 77–78].
]2elpmaxE[

Fugue in B Major / 139

Bars 85–104
The cadence in D-sharp minor balances the previous cadence in
E major [bar 60] in solidity and also in function—though not in
texture: like the upcoming entry and episode, it is in three parts
only. The function is to set up a deceptive staging area for a new
entry. Just as E major masked a launch from G∏, the submediant,
D-sharp minor masks a launch from F∏, the dominant; and the
function of the dominant entry is to stabilize the ﬁnal tonic entry.
The short trio episode that comes in between [bars 89–92] might
be thought too naive for a place in this composition, just as the
earlier long episode might be thought too rhapsodic, but Bach
knits both styles seamlessly and beautifully into a continuum.
The saga of the submediants ends in entry 14 [bar 93], the ﬁnal
tonic entry, which, unlike the previous tonic entry, entry 12, has
been fully prepared. (That was the simple function of the simple
episode.) G∏ still underpins bar 1 of the subject, as well as resonating subtly in bar 2. But the coloration is now not submediant but subdominant; the E-major harmony implied in the original subject (bar 2) comes through clearly for the ﬁrst time (and
the long E in the bass clariﬁes the subject’s metric shape—bars 1
and 3 weak, 2 and 4 strong—also for the ﬁrst time).
All this is valedictory, yet the subject now scales heights it
never risked before. The soprano reaches up to high B. How
will it climb down?
With the greatest of dignity and calm. With no harmonic
undercutting and no tumble of faster notes, as in section 1 of the
fugue. The harmony under the peak note B is tonic harmony
blurred by a suspended A∏ in the tenor—an incredible sound:
acquiescent, sheltered, paciﬁc—and this A∏, as it resolves to G∏,

140 / Fugue in B Major

seems to draw the upper voice down with it. The soprano
response feels like a slow, deep bow . . . touched with something
like regret, though feelings are blurred by another suspended
note, D∏ in the bass. Even as the fugue quietly gives up aspirations for the heights, it moots conﬁdent new possibilities, even
now, for breadth. The ritual of measured half notes in the subject builds up from the original seven notes to eight.
The evocation of binary structuring that Bach makes so much
of in the Fugue in B-ﬂat Major fades in B Major into a mere suggestion, but an unmistakable suggestion, when the slow trill ﬁgure from the end of section 1 is heard again in the soprano, sustained by the tenor [bars 98–99]. The counterpoint begins to
coalesce into chords, until the second subject returns for the last
time, not in its role as a wellspring of counterpoint, but as harmony: a single diminished-seventh chord spreads out under the
ﬁngers of both hands, a keyboard player’s loose arpeggiation [bars
100–101]. To me this is an utterly poignant moment, though like
so much else in this work, the poignancy is restrained. The last
two bars are pure grace.
It was Riemann’s insight that a “turning point” occurs in the
fugue after the cadence in bar 60, a turning away from counterpoint toward melody—toward melody and harmony. The turn
can be followed bar by bar in the fugue’s coda, in bars 97–109.
Of course this is a relative matter; counterpoint is always present. But whereas at ﬁrst we hear the fugue ﬂex contrapuntal
muscle to engage the subject with one countersubject after
another, later—after the breach imposed by the long episode—
countersubjects are either absent (entry 12), obscured by voice
crossing (entry 13), or simply subsidiary, hemmed in by very

Fugue in B Major / 141

strong outer voices (entry 14). In the long episode, the soprano
pulls away from the lower voices and sings its own song; the
cantilena of its whole notes and the bravura of its dotted rhythms
are both new to the fugue and expansive. For all the choice
details of voice-leading in entry 12, it is the free melodic sequence
D∏
C∏ | B . . . ∫ G∏ G∏ F∏ E | D∏ in the soprano that moves
us, I think, a melodic shape that is also half-new, a benediction
from without (see example 22). To this melody the subject itself
becomes a compliant bass.
Stunning moments in this fugue are the outcome of harmonic
thinking—bars 75–78, 94–95—and harmony controls more
humble passages too, such as the trio-style episode. Friends of this
writer will be invited to remember him while listening to this
piece, along with the great tranquil Prelude in B-ﬂat Major that
belongs with another fugue, the one examined in the previous
chapter. The Fugue in B Major will be transposed in honor of its
new prelude, even as the moonlighting prelude will hallow its
new fugue.

Afterword

A prelude of quite special warmth, and full of youthful ﬁre!
and a double fugue which forms one of the noblest numbers
in the work, and one which has, above all, a soft elegiacal
character showing itself more and more in the second half,
and giving to it the appearance of an epilogue (somewhat
after the manner of Schumann’s “The Poet Speaks”); so
that one almost regrets that it is not the last number of the
second book. . . .
In truth this fugue is the real epilogue of The WellTempered Clavier!

There is a good deal to interrogate, as today’s critics like to say,
in this assertion. Hugo Riemann was so committed to the idea of
the organic work of art that he elected to post a dream of The
Well-Tempered Clavier as a “work,” a coherent cycle—like
Schumann’s Kinderszenen, like Dichterliebe, like (perhaps) the
Chopin Preludes—with a carefully calculated termination,
though of course he knew perfectly well it was not. What he did
know was that the deft, low-key Fugue in B Minor, next in order
143

144 / Afterword

and the last in The Well-Tempered Clavier, refused to round it out
with any kind of deﬁnitive gesture of closure.
The notion of a misplaced epilogue to the WTC seems wrongheaded to musicians and listeners today, not many of whom will
want to associate the mood of the Fugue in B Major with “Der
Dichter spricht,” the meditative, nostalgic, half-improvisatory
ﬁnal number of Kinderszenen, either. The nobility of fugues may
also present a problem. Yet Riemann’s characterization of the
second half of the fugue as “softly elegiacal” would probably
gain more assent. I hope so, having characterized the passage as
“valedictory” myself.
The correlation of aesthetic effects with data analyzed from
the scores themselves was, I believe, the bottom line in Riemann’s
method, as it is in mine, though given his other concerns he
might not have wanted to put it that way. This was the payoff
line for Riemann because it was here that he engaged with the
work of art as art, as a variety of human experience rather than
a text to analyze.
The analytical plays in to the aesthetic. One premise for a
musical criticism that distances itself from the impressionistic is
that speciﬁc passages, progressions, notes, and harmonies in the
score provoke our experience of music. The important clarifying
phrase here is “rather than the musical ﬂow in general,” for a lot
of writing about Bach fugues enthuses about the manipulation of
the subjects and answers, analyzes the episodes, and then seems
to take it for granted that the piece will run along on its own, or
at any rate without further commentary. No account is taken of
the varied, subtle, essential ways in which the matter is deployed
in time.
When Donald Tovey made his well-known distinction be-

Afterword / 145

tween Baroque music as “architectural” and music in the
Classical style as “dramatic,” he was acknowledging ambiguity in
the concept of musical form; most music has form of some kind,
in the sense of a signiﬁcant ordering of events in time, but form
means something very different for Haydn than it does for Bach.
The music moves through time in different ways, epitomized for
Tovey by differences in the process of tonal modulation. Unfortunately his formulation carries the implication that Baroque
music is static, or at least relatively static, and that vertical relationships are the ones that really matter in contrapuntal music,
not horizontal, temporal ones. Tovey sometimes came close to
saying just this—as when on one occasion he advised listeners to
expect no more from Bach than “a noble ﬂow of fugue texture.”
I don’t recall such advice in connection with Bach keyboard
fugues, of which he seldom published analyses, and when he
did, as in his Companion to “The Art of Fugue,” he didn’t always
act on that implication. In any case, while this book follows
Tovey’s lead in some obvious ways, there is a deep level on which
it runs counter to Tovey. I also part company with Laurence
Dreyfus when he reads Bach’s fugues as “relatively static rather
than dynamic”; see page 100.
Another premise for criticism is that music’s character is
somehow accessible to words. No one believes that the technical
information put forth by critics and analysts can explain music’s
affective quality, only that it can offer support for assertions—
verbal constructions—that they make about quality. And almost
everything about the project has always been fragile. Skeptics
will not believe that aesthetic effects are more than subjective
“impressions.” While “data” can presumably be veriﬁed objectively, one self-appointed authority selects particular data from

146 / Afterword

the mass available in any situation and unilaterally afﬁrms its
salience. And it hardly needs saying (though perhaps it does,
once in a while) that response to music depends on more than
just the score: on performance, tradition, audience psychology,
ideology, and so on.
Small wonder this kind of criticism isn’t widely practiced.
Over the years, its practitioners do so with clearer eyes and lower
expectations. That there is something more than personal whim
in judgments about art we infer from small facts such as this: a
critic writing around 1900 could ﬁnd a passage in a WTC fugue
“elegiacal” and point to that as a primary feature of the work
(“above all”), while another critic writing around 2000 experiences it as valedictory—and just as primary. The two adjectives brush against a common nexus of feeling. I am sure that
Bach’s own contemporaries sensed something of the same kind
in this music, and that if they had written about it, which they
did not, since they did not consider it primary, they would have
found other adjectives for it, adjectives of their own and of their
own time.
Riemann adduced data analyzed from the text of the WTC to
support what he said about the character of the fugue, and I have
done the same. He knew, I know, and everyone knows that prose
cannot track the immediacy of aesthetic experience. But prose
can cozy up to it, suggest it, create an aura about it that heightens sensitivity. Such writing depends on simile (“like a deep
bow”), metaphor (“a gust of air”), the pathetic fallacy (a ﬁgure
“emerges from the shadows”), logorrhea (music that is “acquiescent, sheltered, paciﬁc”). We accept that words will often fall
ﬂat, if sometimes they can provide light, insight.

Afterword / 147

. . .
The reader who glances back at the essay on the Fugue in B
Major with these questions in mind will ﬁnd all the samples of
verbiage just cited, as well as sentences containing no special
words at all, only technical description. It may seem like dry
analysis. Yet these submissions too, or most of them, are meant to
function directly as criticism—even as they continually expose
another of criticism’s notorious fragilities. A critic may intuit but
fail to find figurative language to register issues of aesthetic
import. (The situation can be dire when the issues are important
enough.) “Two bars later G∏ is touched again”; this matters, but
why—to what aesthetic end? Often one cannot say, but best put
it in, alert the musician-reader, and maybe energize his or her
own response.
I spoke of two premises above. A third and deepest premise is
that music’s grip on our inner life is tied up with our other feelings, not predicated, as used to be argued, on some special “aesthetic emotion.” This premise is not too fragile. It will seem selfevident to many. Talk mediates, differentiates, elucidates, and
consoles; we use words, however imprecisely, to talk about love
and death because talk, it seems, we must. We also use and surely
must use words to talk about music.

Notes

Preface
Rosen’s introduction . . . Rosen, Fugue, p. 3

Chapter 1. Fugue in C Major

Some pieces are sketches . . . Kirkpatrick, p. 3
As Hermann Keller writes . . . Keller, pp. 54–55
Bach, “the deepest savant of contrapuntal arts (and even artiﬁce)” . . .
The New Bach Reader, p. 404
merely interstitial episodes . . . Tovey, Companion, p. 3
as I have written elsewhere . . . Kerman, “Tovey’s Beethoven”
This classic pileup . . . Dreyfus, pp. 153–55

Chapter 2. Fugue in C Minor

by David Schulenberg in The Keyboard Music of J. S. Bach . . .
Schulenberg, pp. 170–71
when Bullivant reaches the chapter on fugal form . . . Bullivant,
p. 148

149

150 / Notes

Bullivant does not fail to note “points of interest” . . . Bullivant, p. 84
Hermann Keller spoke of the music’s “easy comprehensibility” . . .
Keller, p. 54

Chapter 4. Fugue in C-sharp Minor

Eric Lewin Altschuler’s picks for the Top Ten Fugues . . . Altschuler,
p. 67
“Nothing more is heard of this [countersubject],” says Tovey . . .
Tovey, “Commentary,” vol. 1, p. 142
Hermann Keller imagined a “bitter battle” . . . Keller, p. 63
Altschuler’s Long, Slow, and Not My Favorite Club . . . Altschuler,
pp. 246–48
For Philipp Spitta, the ﬁrst great Bach scholar, it was an artwork . . .
Spitta, vol. 2, p. 169
David Schulenberg surely speaks for the consensus . . . Schulenberg, p. 172
Riemann described it darkly . . . Riemann, vol. 2, p. 88
It conducted Busoni through a great cathedral . . . Busoni, WTC,
part 1, p. 29

Chapter 5. Contrapunctus 1
admired and revered, if not always greatly loved . . . see Markham,
pp. 33–39
Benito Rivera has shown in a close analysis . . . Rivera, pp. 354–60

Chapter 6. Contrapunctus 10

Roger Bullivant remarks of this “vague” subject . . . Bullivant, p. 160
one of the profoundest and most beautiful Bach ever wrote . . .
Tovey, Companion, p. 29
The Art of Fugue must, indeed, be played many times . . . Rosen,
Entertainments, p. 47
Do not take Bullivant seriously . . . Bullivant, pp. 159–60

Notes / 151
Chapter 7. Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue, BWV 903

I have taken inﬁnite pains . . . Forkel, p. 468
patterns of three, ﬁve, six, and twelve sixteenth notes . . . as Schenker
showed . . . Schenker, p. 29
Schenker supplied something similar . . . Schenker, pp. 3–5
The music achieves what Spitta called its “demoniacal rush” . . .
Spitta, vol. 3, p. 182
as Schenker chose to demonstrate . . . Schenker, pp. 44–45
as A. E. F. Dickinson puts it in his book on Bach’s fugues . . . Dickinson, p. 112
understandably infuriating Schenker . . . Schenker, p. 46
Bach would not have been the master he was . . . Schenker, p. 56

Chapter 8. Prelude and Fugue in E-ﬂat Major
This Prelude is nothing less than a Toccata and Double Fugue . . .
Tovey, “Commentary,” p. 145
Also troublesome is David Schulenberg’s hearty reference . . . Schulenberg, p. 177
The ﬁrst thing he did on these occasions . . . Forkel, pp. 440–41
a “harmless merry postlude” . . . Riemann, vol. 1, p. 51
Keller practically begged . . . Keller, p. 73
Busoni heartlessly replaced this book 1 fugue . . . Busoni, WTC,
part 1, pp. 44ff.
as Tovey noted sourly . . . Tovey, WTC, preface, pp. vi–vii
Ledbetter points to the subtle role of chromaticism . . . Ledbetter,
p. 176

Chapter 9. Fugue in E Major

according to A. E. F. Dickinson . . . Dickinson, p. 88
Roger Bullivant in his book on fugue admits . . . Bullivant, p. 123
this fugue has been found to be eminently singable . . . see Kerman,
“A (Bach) Fugue”
Dickinson played it on camp pianos . . . Dickinson, p. 88

152 / Notes
Chapter 10. Fugue on “Jesus Christus unser Heiland”

For a more detailed analysis of this fugue, see Kerman, “Fuga super”
The organist and organ historian Norbert Dufourcq . . . Dufourcq,
p. 320

Chapter 11. Fugue in F-sharp Minor
this “beautiful and haunting work,” as Laurence Dreyfus calls it . . .
Dreyfus, p. 156
as Roger Bullivant observes, given the long delay . . . Bullivant,
p. 154
Busoni . . . heard the work as a two-part structure . . . Busoni, WTC,
part 2, p. 32; see also Bullivant, p. 134
Riemann spoke of “a greater inwardness, a deeper sinking into
self ” . . . Riemann, vol. 1, p. 94
So I do not agree with Laurence Dreyfus . . . Dreyfus, p. 157

Chapter 13. Fugue in A-ﬂat Major

these episodes do not feel like “independent, real ‘between’
members” . . . Riemann, vol. 1, p. 89
Tovey went so far as to declare the episodes . . . Tovey, “Commentary,” vol. 1, p. 156
calls the subject of this fugue “lovable” . . . Ledbetter, p. 209
From the diaries of Cosima Wagner . . . Wagner, pp. 56, 235, 270–
72, 498
An essay by Christian Thorau . . . Thorau, pp. 168–84

Chapter 14. Fugue in A Minor

The Bach scholar Peter Williams . . . Williams, ch. 4
Sir Hubert Parry called the Fugue in A Minor “one of Bach’s very
ﬁnest fugues” . . . Parry, p. 109

Notes / 153
Chapter 15. Fugue in B-ﬂat Major

Hermann Keller found the countersubjects . . . Keller, p. 191
This is what Tovey had in mind . . . Tovey, “Commentary,” vol. 2,
p. 19
Schulenberg suggests . . . Schulenberg, p. 226

Chapter 16. Fugue in B Major
Riemann, who admired the B-Major Fugue for its contrasts . . . Riemann, vol. 2, p. 195
Schulenberg even speaks of a “sonata-style return” . . . Schulenberg,
p. 229
It was Riemann’s insight . . . Riemann, vol. 2, p. 200

Afterword

A prelude of quite special warmth . . . Riemann, vol. 2, pp. 192, 204
Tovey sometimes came close to saying just this . . . Tovey, “A Listener’s Guide,” p. 26

Notes to the CD

The scores are derived from J. S. Bach: Werke, the complete edition
issued by the Bach-Gesellschaft (BG) from 1850 on, except for the
numbers from The Art of Fugue, where we adopt the text of the edition by Davitt Moroney (Henle, 1989). The Gesellschaft edition was
one of the great monuments of nineteenth-century musical philology, and in the 1880s Bach’s keyboard music was edited anew by
Hans Bischoff, in a remarkable variorum edition, still in print
(Warner Brothers Publications). More recent scholarly editions are
the keyboard volumes of the Neue Bach Ausgabe (NBA), published
in the 1990s, and the Associated Board’s Well-Tempered Clavier,
edited by Richard Jones in 1994.
The new editions emend the traditional texts of any of the sixteen
fugues in this book only slightly, and not always for the better. In the
Fugue in C Major ( 10 ), for example, the single new reading given
by the NBA and Jones is a detail noted, but not accepted, by Bischoff:

erhyltcaxb–BELPMAX

a. Neue Bach Ausgabe

b. Bach-Gesellschaft edition

16

9th

155

16

156 / Notes to the CD

This may have been approved by Bach to avoid the exposed ﬁfth
E–B but is no improvement; the variant of the subject is feckless and
never followed up on, and the satisfying ninth chord on B, with its
unprepared dissonance, is sacriﬁced.
In the Fugue in A Minor ( 29 ) the NBA gives an atrocious reading, A B∫ C A | D, for the answer in bar 74, on scant manuscript
authority. But in most fugues, the BG and NBA texts are identical
except for details of notation; this is true even of the Chromatic
Fantasy and Fugue, a work preserved in many manuscript but no
autograph or printed versions, except for just a few very minor variants, again not always improvements. The NBA does not validate
plausible emendations to BG proposed by Schenker, notably the
G∏s in bar 85 of the Chromatic Fugue ( 19 ).
Editors from Bischoff to Jones give a version of the Fugue in B-ﬂat
Major ( 21 ) with signiﬁcant differences from the BG—notably in
the counterpoint to the answer in the opening exposition. The NBA
offers both of these texts as alternatives; again the BG text seems to me
preferable here. But bars 86–90 are best of all in Tovey’s reading:
erhyltcaxb–aCELPMAX

a. J. S. Bach: The Well-Tempered Clavier, ed. Richard Jones

7

b. Forty-Eight Preludes and Fugues by J. S. Bach,
ed. Donald Francis Tovey
87

Notes to the CD / 157

The instruments played on the CD are from the Instrument
Collection of the Department of Music, University of California,
Berkeley:

.
.

.
.

Clavichord by Martin Kather (Hamburg), 1999, adapted from
the eighteenth-century clavichord plan by the American organ
builder David Tannenberg (1728–1804). Pitch A = 415, temperament after Georg Andreas Sorge (1744).
Harpsichord by John Phillips (Berkeley), 1995, after the historical instrument in the Musée instrumental, Cité de la Musique,
Paris, built by Andreas Ruckers (Antwerp, 1646), rebuilt by
François-Étienne Blanchet (Paris, 1756) and Pascal Taskin (Paris,
1780). Pitch A = 415, temperament after G. A. Sorge.
Organ by Jurgen Ahrend (Leer-Loga), 1971, after late-seventeenth-century North German models. Two manuals, twelve
speaking stops. Pitch A = 440, temperament modiﬁed Werckmeister III.
Steinway piano, pitch A = 440, equal temperament.

Glossary

Page references (e.g., p. 73) are to the text of this book. Track/bar
references to the scores on the CD appear in the form 20 bar 13.
alteration application of a sharp or ﬂat to one of the “natural”
notes of the scale; G∫ is an altered form of G: p. 73 21 bar 34.
alto see voice
answer loosely, subject entry that follows another and seems to
“answer” it. More speciﬁcally, second subject entry in a fugue,
“answering” the ﬁrst in the dominant key. (Only rarely is the
answer in another key: p. 40 17 bars 3–6. Occasionally the subject ﬁrst appears in the dominant, in which case the answer will
be in the tonic: p. 68 20 bars 25–28.)
The answer makes a (momentary) modulation; for this purpose, most fugues can make use of a real answer in the dominant,
identical to the subject in its shape (or pitch structure), while
others require a tonal answer, slightly modiﬁed in shape: p. 15 12
bars 3–4. In fugues with tonal answers, this altered form of the
subject may be identiﬁed as “the answer” throughout, to distinguish its shape from the original subject: p. 131 33 bars 78–81.
arpeggio “rolling” chord, in which the notes are played successively
rather than simultaneously, as on a harp: p. 53 18 bars 33–48.
159

160 / Glossary

augmentation expansion of all the time values of a theme or
motif, usually by a factor of two: p. 92 24 bars 57–67. Free augmentation: p. 77 23 bars 12–15.
augmented (1) time values lengthened: see augmentation; (2)
intervals made larger by chromatic alteration. The interval of an
augmented 5th C>G∏ is a semitone larger than a perfect 5th
C>G: p. 35 16 bars 41–43.
bass see voice
BINARY FORM a formal schema a a b b, derived from the repeated
strains of dance music, in which b typically employs the same
motifs as a and closes with a cadence “rhyming” with that of a.
Bach’s fugal gigues are in binary form, and some other of his
fugues show its inﬂuence: see p. 20.
BWV The Bach Werke Verzeichniss (Catalog of Bach’s works) by
Wolfgang Schmieder. BWV numbers are assigned to Bach compositions by analogy with Köchel numbers for Mozart (but unlike
K numbers, BWV numbers bear no reference to chronology).
cadence point of rest or articulation in music, or the progression
(melodic or chordal) leading up to and establishing such a point.
Cadences come at various levels of conclusiveness, ranging from
a full cadence ending a work in the tonic, to a half cadence, a
cadence arriving on the dominant, which demands a new beginning: p. 68 20 bars 10, 25, 49. A stylized cadential progression is
easy to recognize; a deceptive or interrupted cadence is a stylized
progression that is undercut at the last moment (typically by substitution of the submediant for the terminal tonic): p. 134 35
bars 13, 17. Rhyming cadences are cadential progressions at different points of a composition that strongly resemble and recall
one another: p. 128 33 bars 39–41, 90–93.
chromaticism use of many altered (“chromatic”) notes in a work,
passage, or theme. The chromatic scale is one consisting entirely
of semitone steps; a much-used chromatic theme proceeds by ﬁve
descending semitone steps: see pp. 115–16 31 bars 37–39.
circle of fifths ﬂuent and much-used progression of chords built
on pitches a 5th apart, e.g., A D G C F: p. 29 15 bars 95–98.
contrapuntal inversion relocation of one or more lines in a contrapuntal complex up/down by an octave or another interval (so

Glossary / 161

that, typically, the one originally on top is now below the other/s):
p. 5 10 bars 7–8 etc.
counterpoint simultaneous combination of two or more melodic
lines, which are said to be in counterpoint with one another; a line
in such a combination can be referred to as a counterpoint (p. 63
19 bar 154). Polyphonic texture is often called contrapuntal, or
simply “counterpoint.” Double/triple counterpoint is a combination of two/three lines in counterpoint that will invert contrapuntally: p. 28 15 bars 73–91.
countersubject counterpoint to the answer in the opening exposition of a fugue, so called only when it recurs later as a functional
feature of the work: pp. 87–88 24 bars 5–7, 13–16.
diad chord of two notes: p. 134 35 bars 1–4.
diminished (1) time values shortened: see diminution; (2) intervals
made smaller by chromatic alteration. Most common are the
diminished 5th, e.g., A> E∫, a semitone smaller than the perfect
5th A> E, and the diminished 7th A> G∫, a semitone smaller
than the minor 7th A> G: p. 24 15 bar 2.
diminished-7th chord chord formed by stacking minor 3rds, such
as A C E∫ G∫, in which the outer interval of a 7th is diminished
(A>G∫). This is the most dissonant chord routinely used by
Bach: p. 140 35 bars 100–101.
diminution reduction of all the time values of a theme or motif,
usually by half: p. 79 23 bars 26–29. Free diminution: p. 80 23
bars 3, 35.
dominant 5th scale degree (5) or the triad built on it (V or v).
double fugue fugue with two subjects, presented at once in the
opening exposition: p. 68 20 (or: presented in separate expositions, then later combined).
doubling addition to a melodic line of another line in another
voice in 3rds or 6ths above or below that maintains the interval
throughout: p. 45 17 bar 87.
ÉCHAPPÉE “escape note,” dissonant note that escapes from strictly
consonant counterpoint between two lines, approached by a leap
from a consonant note and left by a step to a consonant note in
the opposite direction, or vice versa. See p. 111 29 bar 11.

162 / Glossary

episode internal passage in a fugue that does not contain an
actual subject entry: p. 12 12 ; some nonsubject passages are
not genuinely “episodic” in function but rather transitions,
cadential preparations, codas, etc.: see p. 43. A recurring episode
is one that returns for a second or third time in a fugue, typically transposed and in contrapuntal inversion: p. 12 12 bars 5–
6, 17–19.
exposition opening section of a fugue, encompassing the systematic entry of all the voices: p. 4 10 bars 1–7. The voices nearly
always come in the order tonic, dominant, tonic, dominant, etc.,
but cf. p. 40 17 bars 1–11.
false stretto see stretto
fermata mark above a note or chord indicating that it is to be
drawn out for an indeﬁnite time, irrespective of the beat: p. 48 17
bar 120.
figure a short, distinctive melodic/rhythmic unit (cf. motif; a ﬁgure need not recur).
free operation not performed absolutely strictly, as applied to
diminution, augmentation, inversion, etc. Thus in a free diminution most but not all the notes are shortened. (But a free stretto
is usually called “false.”)
hypermeter recurring pulse experienced on a higher level than
the beat or the bar—for example, after every three half notes in
2
2 time: p. 76 23 bars 1–7.
imitation in contrapuntal music, restatement of the same theme
or motif in several voices.
interval distance—strictly speaking, difference in frequency,
measured in scale units—between two pitches, heard either successively (as in a melody) or simultaneously (as in a chord). The
common intervals are the minor 2nd, usually called a half step or
semitone (e.g., E–F or F–E), major 2nd or whole step (E–F∏),
minor 3rd (E>G), major 3rd (E>G∏), perfect 4th (E>A), perfect
5th (E>B), minor 6th (E>C), major 6th (E>C∏), minor 7th
(E>D), major 7th (E>D∏), and the octave (E>E). (A “fourth”
may denote a chord such as C + F or a melodic leap C>F.)
inversion, contrapuntal see contrapuntal inversion; counterpoint

Glossary / 163

inversion, melodic reversal of the intervals in a progression,
motif, or melodic passage: D–E inverts to E–D, and C–D–E–
F inverts as C–B–A–G (or, more strictly, C–B∫–A∫–G): p. 40
17 bars 8–10.
key pieces and passages of music can be located at different pitch
levels: thus “Three Blind Mice” starts with the pitches E D C in
the key of C major or B A G in the key of G major. If a piece is
transposed to another key, scale degrees are heard and numbered
the same—3 2 1, in this case. (To obtain preludes and fugues in
all the keys for the WTC Bach sometimes transposed works from
one key to another—in one extreme case, from F major to A-ﬂat
major.) Different keys used in a single piece are either related
(e.g., C major and G major) or remote (e.g., C major and G-ﬂat
major).
leading tone pitch a half step below the tonic, which is the 7th
scale degree (7) in the major mode, e.g., B in the key of C major
(but the 7th degree in C minor, B∫, is not the leading tone). The
triad on the leading tone (Bπ D F in C major) is diminished and
does not support a key.
leap progression from one pitch to another over an interval greater
than a step: e.g., downward leap of a 6th, p. 12 12 bars 5–6.
linear refers to the melodic and contrapuntal aspect of music,
rather than the harmonic or textural. One speaks of a melodic
line, or the contrapuntal lines (voices) of a fugue.
liquidation term from Schenkerian analysis used in this book
more loosely, for a developmental or repetitive process in which
a motif or theme gradually loses its original contour and character: p. 121 31 bars 59–60.
mediant 3rd scale degree (3)—E in C major or E∫ in C minor—or
the triad built on it (iii or III). In C major the mediant triad E G B
furnishes the related key of E minor (iii). In C minor the mediant
triad E∫ G B∫ furnishes the related key of E-ﬂat major (III).
modulation move from one key to another: p. 72 21 bars 1–2.
(The concept of key “change” is ﬂuid. Whether to call something a modulation, a temporary modulation, or merely a reference to another key is a matter of emphasis and often dispute
among music theorists.)

164 / Glossary

motif a short, distinctive melodic/rhythmic unit used over and
over again in a composition: p. 117 31 bar 39.
pedal single pitch, typically in the bass voice, maintained over a
period of time—roughly speaking, time enough to draw attention; p. 9 10 bars 24–27.
polyphony musical texture entailing several melodic lines heard
simultaneously: as in fugue.
progression pitches or chords following another in time. The
melodic step E–F and combinations like E–F–G–A can be
referred to as melodic progressions. A dominant chord followed
by a tonic chord forms a harmonic progression.
real answer see answer
recto original, right-way-up version of a theme or motif that has
been presented in inversion: p. 40 17 bars 14–17.
register position (high or low, treble or bass, etc.) within the
working range of pitches, as applied to a note or a passage.
remote as applied to keys: see key
resolution technically, progression from a dissonant note or
chord to a consonant one; more loosely, sense of relaxation or rest
after music of some intensity. The typical melodic resolution in
a cadence adopts the step 2–1: p. 23 15 bars 1–3.
scale degrees constituent notes of the major or minor scale, numbered 1–7 in the key of the work at hand—i.e., in C major C is
1, D is 2, etc.—and named tonic (1), supertonic (2), mediant (3),
subdominant (4), dominant (5), submediant (6), and 7th degree,
or, in the major mode, leading tone (7).
semitone (or half step) see interval
sequence musical passage in which a melodic pattern is repeated
once or more at a different pitch level: p. 12 12 bars 5–6.
seventh degree see leading tone
soprano see voice
step alternate term for the interval of a 2nd.
stretto imitation of a fugue subject in answer by another voice
before the subject has run its full course, typically after the exposition: p. 2 10 . In a stretto fugue the exposition is already in stretto:
p. 87 24 bars 1–19. A free stretto is usually called false; it does not
maintain the subject exactly throughout: p. 35 16 bars 29–30.
subdominant 4th scale degree (4) or the triad built on it (IV or iv).

Glossary / 165

subject basic theme of a fugue, usually clearly demarcated at the
end—but not always: p. 39 17 bars 1–3.
submediant 6th scale degree (6)—A in C major or A∫ in C
minor—or the triad built on it (vi or VI). In C major the submediant triad A C E furnishes the related key of A minor (vi). In
C minor the submediant triad A∫ C E∫ furnishes the related key
of A-ﬂat major (VI).
supertonic 2nd scale degree (2)—E in D major and D minor—
or the triad built on it. In C major, the supertonic triad D F A
furnishes the related key of D minor (ii). In C minor, the supertonic triad D F A∫ is diminished and does not support a key; a
key on the 2nd degree requires an alteration (D F Aπ) and therefore counts as a remote relationship (in C-sharp minor, D∏F∏A∏):
p. 28 15 bars 66–69.
tenor see voice
texture “weave” of music; in polyphonic textures (including fugal
texture) several melodic lines combine or contend. Harmonic texture is smoother, typically using homogeneous chords.
TIERCE DE PICARDIE altered 3rd in the tonic triad of a key in the
minor mode, the “Picardy third” transforms it into the major—
in C minor, C Eπ G instead of C E∫ G—and is a traditional ending gesture in minor-mode compositions of Bach’s time: p. 14 12
bar 31.
tonal answer see answer
tonic 1st scale degree (1) or the triad built on it (I or i).
transposition change of a work or passage from one key to
another: p. 13 12 bar 21.
triad chord of three notes built up from a “root” by stacking
major and/or minor 3rds: p. 138 35 bars 75–78. The four possible kinds of triad on the root C are the major triad (C E G), minor triad (C E∫ G), diminished triad (C E∫ G∫), and augmented
triad (C E G∏). Triads can be numbered with capital (major) or
lowercase (minor) digits according to the scale position of their
roots. In C major the triad on C is designated I, the triad on D ii.
turn loosely, brief ornament, such as E F E as an ornament for E:
p. 46 17 bars 89–98.
voice contrapuntal line in a fugue, whether the fugue is sung or
played on instruments, identified by singers’ names: soprano,
alto, tenor, bass.

Bibliography

Altschuler, Eric Lewin. Bachanalia: The Essential Listener’s Guide to
Bach’s Well-Tempered Clavier. Boston: Little, Brown, 1994.
Bullivant, Roger. Fugue. London: Hutchinson, 1971.
Busoni, Ferruccio. Zwei Kontrapunct-Studien für Klavier, nach Joh.
Seb. Bach. Wiesbaden: Breitkopf & Härtel, 1917.
———, ed. The Well-Tempered Clavichord by Johann Sebastian Bach,
Revised, Annotated, and Provided with Parallel Examples and Suggestions for the Study of Modern Pianoforte-Technique. New York:
G. Schirmer, 1895.
Dickinson, A. E. F. Bach’s Fugal Works. London: Pitman, 1956.
Dreyfus, Laurence. Bach and the Patterns of Invention. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1996.
Dufourcq, Norbert. Jean-Sébastien Bach, le maître de l’orgue. Paris:
Floury, 1948.
Forkel, J. N. “On Johann Sebastian Bach’s Life, Genius, and
Works.” In The New Bach Reader: A Life of Johann Sebastian
Bach in Letters and Documents, ed. Hans T. David and Arthur
Mendel, rev. Christoph Wolff, pp. 417–82. New York: Norton,
1998.
Keller, Hermann. The Well-Tempered Clavier by Johann Sebastian
Bach. Tr. Leigh Garden. New York: Norton, 1976.
167

168 / Bibliography

Kerman, Joseph. “A (Bach) Fugue for Andrew.” In Words on Music:
Essays in Honor of Andrew Porter, ed. Claire Brook and David
Rosen, pp. 92–98. New York: Pendragon, 2003.
———. “Bach’s Greatest Hit.” Review of Bachanalia, by Eric
Lewin Altschuler. New York Review of Books, October 6, 1994,
pp. 22–23.
———. “Fuga Super: Jesus Christus unser Heiland. A 4. Manualiter.” In Musical Transformations and Musical Intuition: Eleven
Essays in Honor of David Lewin, ed. Raphael Atlas and Michael
Chernin, pp. 167–78. Roxbury, Mass.: Overbird Press, 1994.
———. “Salience and Serendipity” [on BWV 872/2]. In Remembering Oliver Strunk, Teacher and Scholar, ed. Christine Mueler
and Pierluigi Petrobelli, pp. 35–43. New York: Pendragon, 2004.
———. “Tovey’s Beethoven.” In Write All These Down: Essays on
Music, ch. 10. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994.
Kirkpatrick, Ralph. Interpreting Bach’s Well-Tempered Clavier: A
Performer’s Discourse of Method. New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1984.
———. Liner notes to Bach: Das wohltemperierte Clavier. Deutsche
Grammophon LPM 18844–5. Rec. 1965.
Ledbetter, David. Bach’s Well-tempered Clavier: The 48 Preludes and
Fugues. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2002.
Markham, Michael. “‘The Usefulness of Such Artworks’: Expression, Analysis, and Nationalism in The Art of Fugue.” repercussions 9 (2001): 33–75.
Parry, C. Hubert H. Johann Sebastian Bach: The Story of the Development of a Great Personality. New York: Putnam, 1909.
Prout, Ebenezer. Fugue. London: Augener, 1891.
Riemann, Hugo. Analysis of J. S. Bach’s Wohltemperirte Clavier: 48
Preludes and Fugues. Tr. J. S. Shedlock. 2 vols. London: Augener,
1890.
Rivera, Benito V. “Bach’s Use of Hitherto Unrecognized Types of
Countersubjects in the ‘Art of Fugue.’” Journal of the American
Musicological Society 31 (1978): 344–62.
Rosen, Charles. Critical Entertainments: Music Old and New. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000.

Bibliography / 169

———, ed. Bach: The Fugue. Oxford Keyboard Classics, ed.
Howard Ferguson. London: Oxford University Press, 1975.
Schenker, Heinrich, ed. J. S. Bach’s Chromatic Fantasy and Fugue
[1910]. Tr. with a commentary by Heidi Siegel. New York: Longman, 1984.
Schulenberg, David. The Keyboard Music of J. S. Bach. New York:
Schirmer Books, 1992.
———. Reviews of Neue Bach Ausgabe keyboard volumes, Music
Library Association Notes 55 (1998–99): 755–60; and Journal of the
American Musicological Society 55 (2002): 353–65.
Spitta, Philipp. Johann Sebastian Bach: His Work and Inﬂuence on the
Music of Germany, 1685–1750. Tr. Clara Bell and J. A. FullerMaitland. 3 vols. 1884. Reprint (2 vols.), New York: Dover, 1951.
Stauffer, George B. “‘This Fantasia . . . Never Had its Like’: On the
Enigma and Chronology of Bach’s Chromatic Fantasia and
Fugue in D Minor, BWV 903.” Bach Studies 1 (1989): 160–82.
Thorau, Christian. “Richard Wagners Bach.” In Bach und die Nachwelt, ed. Michael Heinemann and Hans-Joachim Hinrichsen,
vol. 2, pp. 163–200. Laaber: Laaber, 1999.
Tomita, Yo. Bach Bibliography for the Global Community of Bach
Scholars. www.music.qub.ac.uk/~tomita/bachbib/
Tovey, Donald Francis. “Commentary.” In J. S. Bach: The WellTempered Clavier, ed. Richard Jones. 2 vols. London: Associated
Board of the Royal Schools of Music, 1994.
———. A Companion to “The Art of Fugue” (Die Kunst der Fuge)
[of] J. S. Bach. London: Associated Board of the Royal Schools of
Music, 1931.
———. “A Listener’s Guide to Die Kunst der Fuge.” In Essays in
Musical Analysis: Chamber Music, ed. Hubert Foss, pp. 75–89.
London: Oxford University Press, 1944.
———, ed. Forty-Eight Preludes and Fugues by J. S. Bach. London:
Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music, 1924. Tovey’s
preface is reprinted with some omissions as “Commentary” in
Jones, J. S. Bach: The Well-Tempered Clavier.
Wagner, Cosima. Cosima Wagner’s Diaries 1878–1883. Ed. Martin
Gregor-Dellin and Dietrich Mack, tr. Geoffrey Skelton. New
York: Harcourt, 1980.

170 / Bibliography

Williams, Peter. The Chromatic Fourth During Four Centuries of
Music. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997.
Yearsley, David. Bach and Meanings of Counterpoint. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2002.

Index

For technical terms not indexed, see
page references given in the Glossary,
pages 159–65.

3; organicism, 24; as organist, 68;
pedagogy, 11; revisions, 37–38,
40, 156; slyness, 125–28, 131; systematic thinking, 116; virtuosity,
1, 34, 53, 83, 88, 130; wit, 73
Bach, Johann Sebastian, works
(see also Art of Fugue; WellTempered Clavier): Chromatic
Fantasy and Fugue, 51–63, 66,
156; Clavierbüchlein für Wilhelm
Friedemann Bach, 17; Clavierübung, 85; Duetti, 85; English
Suite no. 3 in G Minor, 107; —,
Gigue, 103–7, 112; Fantasy and
Fugue in A Minor, xviii; —,
Fantasy, 121; —, Fugue, 109–
14, 156; Fughetta in C Major,
BWV 952, 17–21, 112; Fughetta
in C Major, BWV 953, 17–18;
Fugue in E-ﬂat (“St. Anne”),
BWV 552, 69, 85; Fugue in

Altschuler, Eric Lewin, 23, 30
answer, tonal, 15
Art of Fugue, The, xv, 23, 48–49, 52;
cyclicity, 49; editions, 40–41; performance, 33–34; publication,
33, 37, 40; revision, 37–38, 40
—contrapuncti: no. 1, 33–38, 41,
58–49; no. 3, 48; no. 4, 112; no. 8,
49; no. 10, 38, 39–49; no. 11, 49;
no. 14, 123
—Fuga 6, 41–49
Bach, Carl Philipp Emanuel, 4, 126
Bach, Johann Sebastian: awkwardness, 6, 110; editions, 155–56;
improvisation, 25, 34, 54, 60;
number and letter symbolism,

171

172 / Index
Bach, J. S., works (continued)
G Minor (“Little”), BWV 535, 13;
Fugue on a Theme by Albinoni,
BWV 951, 55; Fugue on “Jesus
Christus unser Heiland,” 85–
101; Fugues in A Minor for keyboard, BWV 894 and BWV 944,
55; gigues, 103; Goldberg Variations, 85; Italian Concerto, 85;
Mass in B Minor, 7, 95, 101, 116;
The Musical Offering, 52; Passacaglia and Fugue, BWV 582, 15,
54; Passion According to St. Matthew, 93–94; suites (French, English, Partitas), 103; Toccata and
Fugue in D Minor, BWV 565,
66; Toccata and Fugue in D Minor (“Dorian”), BWV 538, 66
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 4, 30–31,
138; Große Fuge, 133–34
binary form, 20, 103–5, 111, 128
Bischoff, Hans, 155–56
Bullivant, Roger, 11–12, 39, 49, 79,
97
Bülow, Hans von, 58
Busoni, Ferruccio, 32, 52, 72

empﬁndsamer Stil, 51, 122, 126
episodes, 4, 43, 45–47, 61; recurring,
12, 37

cadenza, 34, 36
chorale, choral prelude, 85–86
chorale fugue, 86, 92
chromaticism, 53, 56–57, 73, 87,
115–16
criticism, 55, 144–47

Moroney, Davitt, 153
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 30

Fischer, J. C. F., 83
Forkel, J. N., 51, 68
Froberger, Johann Jakob, 83
fugue: character of, xvii, 144;
deﬁned, 4
Fux, Johann Joseph, 83
Haydn, Joseph, 73, 145
instruments on the CD, 153
“Jesus Christus unser Heiland”
(chorale), 85–87, 89; Fugue on,
85–101
Jones, Richard, xvi, 155–56
Keller, Hermann, 3, 13, 29, 125,
129–30
Kirkpatrick, Ralph, xxiii, 2
Ledbetter, David, xxii, 66, 73, 83, 112
Liszt, Franz, 31, 52, 114

“Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland”
(chorale), 32
organicism, 24

developing variation, 25
Dickinson, A. E. F., 58, 75, 83
Dreyfus, Laurence, 6, 11, 95, 100, 147
Dufourcq, Norbert, 87, 93

“Palestrina” style, 35
Parry, C. Hubert H., 121–22
Pirro, André, 121

Index / 173
preludes, xiv, 14, 34, 54, 65–73, 97,
143, 147
Prout, Ebenezer, 15
Purcell, Henry, 116
Riemann, Hugo, 31, 99, 111, 127,
135, 140, 143–46
Rivera, Benito V., 37
Rosen, Charles, xvi–xvii, 48
Schenker, Heinrich, 11, 52–53, 56,
58, 60–62, 156
Schoenberg, Arnold, 25
Schulenberg, David, 11, 31, 65, 127,
137
Schumann, Robert, 93, 143–44
Schweitzer, Albert, 121
sonata, style and form, 31, 114,
137
Spitta, Philipp, 31, 56
Stauffer, George B., 51, 58
Stokowski, Leopold, 66
stretto, 2, 5, 29, 40, 68, 76, 115
Swingle Singers, 84
Thorau, Christian, 114
toccata, 65–66
Tovey, Donald Francis, xv–xvi, 4,
24, 40, 65, 70, 72, 79, 111, 126,
144–45, 156
trio texture, 20, 96, 139

Wagner, Cosima, 113–14
Wagner, Richard, 31, 113–14
Well-Tempered Clavier, The, xviii,
1, 17, 67, 133–34, 143; relations
between preludes and fugues,
54, 72–73
—book 1 fugues: A-ﬂat Major,
10, 23, 109–14; B-ﬂat Major,
15; B-ﬂat Minor, 30; B Minor,
95, 101; C Major, 1–9, 12;
C Minor, 3, 9, 11–15, 130;
C-sharp Minor, xxii, 23–32;
E-ﬂat Major, 15, 72–73; E-ﬂat
Minor, 54; E Major, 15; F Minor,
15; F-sharp Major, 15; F-sharp
Minor, 54, 95–101
—book 1 preludes: C Major, 2;
C Minor, 14; D-sharp Minor, 54;
E-ﬂat Major, xiv, 34, 65–73;
F-sharp Minor, 54, 97
—book 2 fugues: A Minor, 54; B-ﬂat
Major, 20, 105, 112, 125–32, 135–
36, 140; B Major, 133–41, 143–
44, 147; B Minor, 143; C-sharp
Major, 23; E Major, 23, 52, 75–
84; F-sharp Major, 156; F-sharp
Minor, 114, 122; G Minor, 45
—book 2 preludes: A Minor, 54;
B-ﬂat Major, 125, 141; B Minor,
143, 147; E Major, 83
Williams, Peter, 116, 121

