SERIOUS SKILLS

The Ancient Art
of
ISBN-13: 978-0-4700-4287-833
ISBN-10: 0-4700-4287-76

of

Bonsai

Saburo Kato
Kato Kimura,
Kimura, sedj
sedj
ByByAmboru

Second Edition

The Ancient
Art
of

Bonsai
By Amboru Kato Kimura, sedj

SERIOUS SKILLS
Wiley Publishing, Inc.

Cover Designer: Pompeii Clarenz
Cover Image by Curacho Images.
Copyright © 2007 by Amboru Kato Kimura, sedj
Published by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published simultaneously in Canada, Japan and UK
ISBN-13: 978-0-4700-4287-833
ISBN-10: 0-4700-4287-76
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted
under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act,
without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 7508400, fax (978) 646-8600. Requests to the Publisher for permission
should be addressed to the Legal Department, Wiley Publishing, Inc.,
10475 Crosspoint Blvd., Indianapolis, IN 46256, (317) 572-3447, fax
(317) 572-4355, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions. Limit
of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: The publisher and the author make no
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties,
including without limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose.
No warranty may be created or extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for
every situation. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional
services. If professional assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the
author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom. The fact that an
organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a
potential source of further information does not mean that the author or
the publisher endorses the information the organization or Website may
provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be
aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or
disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read. For
general information on our other products and services or to obtain
technical support, please contact our Customer Care Department within
the U.S. at (800) 762-2974, outside the U.S. at (317)
572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some
content that appears in print may not be available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available from the
publisher.
TRADEMARKS: Wiley, the Wiley logo, and the Sybex logo are trademarks
or registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates,
in the United States and other countries, and may not be used without
written permission. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.
Wiley Publishing, Inc., is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book.

Pemphis acidula, one of the world’s best bonsai materials from the wild.

"You ask me why I dwell in the green
mountain;
I smile and make no reply for my heart is
free of care.
As the peach blossom which flows
downstream and is gone into the unknown,
I have a world apart that is not among men."
-- Li Po

To Presy

Table Of Contents
CHAPTER 1 - The history of bonsai
• Penjing: History, aesthetics & spiritual background
• The ancient arts of bonsai and penjing
• Zen and the art of bonsai maintenance
CHAPTER 2 - Acquiring & caring for bonsai
• Creating your own bonsai
• Purchasing a tree
• Sunlight
• Watering
• Misting
• Fertilizing
• Repotting
• Trimming & pruning
• Pests & diseases
• Winter care
CHAPTER 3 - Styles of bonsai trees
CHAPTER 4 - Shaping the bonsai
• How to prune bonsai trees
CHAPTER 5 - How to train your bonsai tree
• How to begin
• Wiring a bonsai tree
• Dealing with breaks
• Care after wiring
• Removing the wire
CHAPTER 6 - Additional training techniques
• Tying
• Weighting
• Spreading
• Snugging
• Potting

Table Of Contents (continued)

CHAPTER 7 - Displaying your bonsai outdoors
CHAPTER 8 - Special bonsai plantings
• Rock plantings
• Group plantings
• Saikei, bonseki and bonkei
CHAPTER 9 - Trees suitable for bonsai culture

1

The History of Bonsai

G

azing upon the stark beauty of a bonsai, images of
isolated monasteries on a steep mountainside often
come to mind. While no one can say with certainty, it
is quite likely that the gentle Chinese monks first began
transplanting naturally dwarfed trees into ornamental
containers, and that it was they who first
began to appreciate the windswept
beauty of these trees in their homes and
gardens.
The Japanese, however, have since
been responsible for refining the art of
cultivating bonsai trees to its present
standards. The word bonsai simply means
“a plant in a tray”. Authentic records of
bonsai trees date back to the early 14th
century. It is quite possible, however,
that the practice of bonsai culture
originated over 1,000 years ago in China
on a very basic scale known as pun-sai,
where only a single specimen is grown in a pot. These early
specimens displayed sparse foliage and rugged, gnarled trunks
which often looked like animals, dragons and birds. There are a
great number of myths and legends surrounding Chinese bonsai,
and the grotesque or animal-like trunks and root formations are
still highly-prized today.
Chinese bonsai come from the landscape of the imagination
and images of fiery dragons and coiled serpents take far greater
precedence over the natural beauty of the trees, which is
preferred by Japanese bonsai artists - so the two forms of this
art are quite far apart. The Japanese tend to focus on using
native species for their bonsai - namely pines, azaleas and
maples (regarded as the traditional bonsai plants). In other
countries however, people are more open to opinion, and even
perennial herbs and common weeds are may be grown as
summer bonsai.
It is generally accepted, however, that most bonsai are
trees or shrubs. With Japan’s adoption of many cultural

10

trademarks of China - bonsai was also taken up, introduced to
Japan during the Kamakura period (1185 - 1333) by means of
Zen Buddhism - which at this time was rapidly spreading around
Asia. The exact time is debatable, although it is possible that it
had arrived in AD 1195 as there appears to be a reference to it
in a Japanese scroll attributed to that period. Once bonsai was
introduced into Japan, the art was refined to an extent not yet
approached in China.
Over time, the simple trees were not just confined to the
Buddhist monks and their monasteries, but also later were
introduced to be representative of the aristocracy - a symbol of
prestige and honor. The ideals and philosophy of bonsai were
greatly changed over the years. For the Japanese, bonsai
represents a fusion of strong ancient beliefs with the Eastern
philosophies of the harmony between man, the soul and nature.
In an ancient Japanese scroll written in Japan around the
Kamakura period, it is translated to say : “To appreciate and
find pleasure in curiously curved potted trees is to love
deformity.” Whether this was intended as a positive or negative
statement, it leaves us to
believe that growing dwarfed
and twisted trees in
containers was an accepted
practice among the upper
class of Japan by the
Kamakura period. By the
fourteenth century bonsai
was indeed viewed as a
highly refined art form,
meaning that it must have
been an established practice
many years before that time.
Bonsai were brought
indoors for display at special
times by the “Japanese elite”
and became an important
part of Japanese life by being
displayed on specially
designed shelves. These
complex plants were no
longer permanently reserved
for outdoor display, although

11

Over time, bonsai began to take on different styles, each which varied immensely from one another.

12

the practices of training and pruning did not develop until later
- the small trees at this time still being taken from the wild. In
the 17th and 18th century, the Japanese arts reached their
peak and were regarded very highly. Bonsai again evolved to a
much higher understanding and refinement of nature - although
the containers used seemed to be slightly deeper than those
used today.
The main factor in maintaining bonsai was now the removal
of all but the most important parts of the plant. The reduction
of everything just to
the essential
elements and
ultimate refinement
was very symbolic of
the Japanese
philosophy of this
time - shown by the
very simple Japanese
gardens such as
those in the famous
temple - Roan-ji. At
around this time,
bonsai also became
commonplace to the
general Japanese
public - which
greatly increased demand for the small trees collected from the
wild and firmly established the art-form within the culture and
traditions of the country.
Over time, bonsai began to take on different styles, each
which varied immensely from one another. Bonsai artists
gradually looked into introducing other culturally important
elements in their bonsai plantings such as rocks, supplementary
and accent plants, and even small buildings and people which
itself is known as the art of bon-kei. They also looked at
reproducing miniature landscapes in nature - known as sai-kei
which further investigated the diverse range of artistic
possibilities for bonsai.
Finally, in the mid-19th century, after more than 230 years
of global isolation, Japan opened itself up to the rest of the
world. Word soon spread from travelers who visited Japan of the
miniature trees in ceramic containers which mimicked aged,

13

Bonsai is no longer reserved for the upper-class, but is a joy shared by
executive and factory worker alike.

14

mature, tall trees in
nature. Further
exhibitions in London,
Vienna and Paris in the
latter part of the
century – especially the
Paris World Exhibition in
1900 opened the world’s
eyes up to bonsai.
Due to this
phenomenal upsurge in
the demand for bonsai,
the now widely
expanding industry and
lack of naturally-forming,
stunted plants led to the
commercial production of
bonsai by artists through
training young plants to
grow to look like bonsai.
Several basic styles
were adopted, and
artists made use of wire,
bamboo skewers and growing techniques to do this – allowing
the art to evolve even further.
The Japanese learned to capitalize on the interest in this art
form very quickly - opening up nurseries dedicated solely to
grow, train and then export bonsai trees. Different plants were
now being used to cater for worldwide climates and to produce
neater foliage and more suitable growth habits. Bonsai
techniques such as raising trees from seed or cuttings and the
styling and grafting of unusual, different or tender material onto
hardy root stock were further developed.
Bonsai has now evolved to reflect changing tastes and
times - with a great variety of countries, cultures and
conditions in which it is now practiced. In Japan today, bonsai
are highly regarded as a symbol of their culture and ideals. The
New Year is not complete unless the tokonoma - the special
niche in every Japanese home used for the display of ornaments
and prized possessions - is filled with a blossoming apricot or
plum tree. Bonsai is no longer reserved for the upper-class, but
is a joy shared by executive and factory worker alike.

15

The penjing artist’s goal is not only to re-create a natural scenery in a
container, but to capture its essence and spirit.

16

Penjing: History, aesthetics & spiritual background

Many people think of bonsai as exclusively Japanese. But
there is a long tradition of bonsai from China. Penjing is the
Chinese art of creating a miniature landscape in a container.
The word consists of the two characters shown on the left:
“pen” - “pot” or “container”, and “jing” - “scenery”. An artist
may use plant material and natural stone to portray an idyllic
mountain retreat with a murmuring brook or a waterscape with
a lush tropical island. Or he or she may design a much simpler
scene where one single tree makes up the entire composition.
Penjing and bonsai are closely related art forms. Penjing is
the older form from which bonsai derived. While the similarities
by far outweigh the differences, there is a significant variance
in scope: “Bonsai” literally means a “tree in a pot” and therefore
as an art form, bonsai is more
narrowly defined than penjing, a
“landscape in a pot”. Many of the
beautiful, elaborate tray
sceneries created by Chinese
artists clearly defy the
parameters of bonsai. While
penjing can be found in many
variations, the Chinese
themselves recognize three
distinct categories:
• Tree Penjing (shumu
penjing)
• Landscape Penjing
(shanshui penjing)
• Water-and-Land Penjing (shuihan penjing)
Penjing as an art form spans over a thousand years. Our
earliest historical records of a stone and a plant arranged in a
container to form an artistic scenery date from the Tang
Dynasty (618-907). By the Song Dynasty (960-1279 ), the
Chinese already practiced the art at an advanced artistic level.
Paintings from that period depict pieces that would be prized
among seasoned collectors today. Penjing artists have drawn
much of their inspiration not only from nature, but from nature
poetry and landscape painting.
Similar aesthetic considerations have guided all three art
forms. With landscape painting attaining unprecedented heights

17

Penjing and bonsai are closely related art forms. Penjing is the older form
from which bonsai derived. While the similarities by far outweigh the
differences, there is a significant variance in scope: “Bonsai” literally
means a “tree in a pot” and therefore as an art form, bonsai is more
narrowly defined than penjing, a “landscape in a pot”.

18

during the Song Dynasty (960-1279), penjing, too, was poised
for vigorous artistic development. By the early years of the Qing
Dynasty (1644-1911), the art had become very popular, and
the first manuals appeared. With increasing popularity, however,
more commercial, folkloristic, and regionally defined strands of
penjing sprang up alongside the more sophisticated, artistic
forms.
In addition to aesthetically refined penjing, one could find
trees whose trunks had been coiled to represent dragons or
whose canopies were to depict cloud layers, or trees shaped to
resemble the strokes of fortuitous characters. The variations
were endless. In the later years of the Qing Dynasty, the 19th
century, foreign aggression and
domination led to a decline in
penjing, and this development was
exacerbated during the years of
foreign occupation and humiliation,
war, civil war, and cultural
revolution that China experienced
during much of this century. Old
collections were lost, artists
struggled to survive and to pass
on their wisdom and insights. Only
in the last twenty-plus years have the conditions in China
allowed for a renaissance of this ancient art form.
Today, a quickly growing number of enthusiasts and
collectors have discovered their roots in penjing. It is assumed
that the art of creating miniature trees reached Japan by the
13th century. Beginning in 600 A.D., Japan sent envoys to China
to study her arts and architecture, her language and literature
as well as her law and the forms of Buddhism evolving there,
which were grafted on the original Indian teachings. During
China’s Southern Song Dynasty (1127-1279) in particular, the
Japanese imported Chinese culture and arts on a large scale. It
was during that time that the Chinese form of Buddhism known
as “Ch’an” was introduced to Japan and given the name “Zen” the name by which it is known in the West today. This massive
transmission of culture begun in the the 1200’s would last for
centuries as Japanese artists continued looking to their Chinese
counterparts for guidance and inspiration.
The penjing artist’s goal is not only to re-create a natural
scenery in a container, but to capture its essence and spirit. To

19

achieve this objective, a wide
palette of artistic devices comes
into play. Like a Chinese landscape
painting, a penjing is a study in
contrasts. On a philosophical level,
this presentation of opposites is
evidence of the Chinese artist’s
conceptualization of the universe
as being governed by two poles of
cosmic energy, the yin and the
yang. Artistically, the contrasts
create rhythm and dramatic tension
which then is resolved in a dynamic balance, a delicately tuned
equilibrium.
The attainment of overall structural unity is critical,
especially in a more complex composition like a water-and-land
penjing where design elements such as trees, rocks, mosses,
small grasses, and water all need to harmonize with each other
and contribute to the design in a meaningful fashion. Careful
selection is critical. In addition to deciding on a container and
determining the tentative placement of the composition, the
artist will consider the tree species, number of trees to be
used, their sizes, trunk angles and the density of their foliage
mass. He or she will choose rocks for their size, color, shape,
surface details, and compatibility with the trees.
In the end, each and every element in the design needs to
relate to all the others so that the entire landscape appears as
an all-embracing, encompassing entity. Penjing artists do not
seek to create perfection. As a matter of fact, trees trained
into highly stylized forms where every angle and every root and
branch placement has been meticulously calculated by a rigid
formula do not suit their tastes. Apart from being beautiful, an
outstanding penjing must look entirely natural. It should look as
if Nature herself had spontaneously created it - like a
marvellous accident of Nature.

Spiritual background

Bonsai and penjing may be viewed as objects of meditation.
The act of creating bonsai or penjing by itself is a
contemplative, meditative exercise - a practice of Zen. The
little trees and miniature landscapes can be seen as a
celebration of Nature and the healing powers extended by an

21

intact natural environment. Creating and taking care of bonsai
and penjing will draw you closer to Nature, enabling you to
experience her in a more direct, intimate way.
For a more in-depth understanding of bonsai and penjing,
the practice of creating miniature trees and landscapes should
be viewed against the backdrop of two of China’s great
philosophical traditions, Daoism (Taoism) and Zen Buddhism.
Daoism has exerted a profound infl uence over Far Eastern arts
for over two thousand years. It’s a way of thinking and living
that can liberate mind and
body. Daoism proposes the
return to a state of original
spontaneity by discarding the
rules of rigid conventional
behavior and thinking. It
suggests that by learning to
go with the flow and allowing
our minds to function
naturally, tremendous
creative power can be
unleashed.
Tuning into the rhythm of
Nature and understanding the
interrelatedness of all things
around us are key
components of Daoist
teachings. Zen Buddhism known as “Ch’an” in Chinese
- evolved as a new strand of
Buddhism with unique Chinese
features after Indian monks
introduced Mahayana
Buddhism around 500 A.D. It
came about when a form of Indian Buddhism was grafted upon
the native Chinese Daoist tradition. Chinese-style sitting
meditation (“zuo Ch’an”, a concept called “za zen” in Japanese)
does not seek to bring the mind under rigid control as does
traditional Indian Buddhism, but instead seeks to liberate,
encouraging the mind to fl ow without impediment and to follow
its own, intrinsically good, nature. Ch’an, popularized in the
West under its Japanese name, Zen, teaches that the receptive

23

mind can find
Enlightenment everywhere,
at any time, in the form of
“sudden awakening”.
And so it is that a
bonsai or penjing artist,
working with natural
materials and
concentrating moment to
moment, may come upon
sudden insights,
inspirations, and
resolutions. This is the
creative process. It fi nds
the artist quietly absorbed
in a state of active
meditation. Arranging trees and placing rocks, he suddenly
discovers something new, not pre-meditated - a composition
that flows naturally and harmoniously, engendering great beauty
and universal, eternal truths with seemingly little effort.

The ancient art of bonsai and penjing

Masters of Japanese bonsai and Chinese penjing techniques
are gardening artists. The tiny trees they meticulously shape—
ranging in age from newborn to centenarian — create a sense
of full-grown trees in their natural surroundings while taking up
only the space of a coffee table. Perfecting such miniature
masterpieces is truly the pinnacle of gardening skill.
A well-trained bonsai or penjing specimen should give the
impression of being a tree, not a shrub. Trees have well-defined
foliage layers with open areas between them, while shrubs are
masses of foliage that need pruning to define and improve their
branch structure.
Though many people believe such trees are simply dwarfed
versions of natural trees, the truth of the art form lies in the
creation of the image. Masters manipulate potentially full-sized
trees and mold them into beautiful pieces of art that, with
proper care, can last for generations—sometimes centuries. But
take a bonsai or penjing tree out of its pot and plant it in the
ground, and it’ll reach its full, normal height.
Masters coax the roots of penjing or bonsai specimens over
large rocks placed at the base of young trees or shrubs in

25

The idea of growing and refining a tree in miniature in the confines of a
glazed clay pot is intriguing and found to be a challenge to many who have
grown trees or other plants with success.

26

training. The roots of bonsai plants often rise in sculptural
shapes above the stones.
Some penjing has been trained, or molded, into the shape of
a dragon, with one of its larger branches looking like a head and
another, a tail. Eventually, the art of penjing migrated from
China through Korea to Japan. The Japanese term “bonsai”
refers both to the plant and to the pot or tray in which it sits.
The two must complement each other to create visual harmony.
Bonsai come in all sizes: miniature (six inches tall or less), small
(six to 12 inches), medium (12 to 24 inches), and large (24 to
48 inches).
It’s certainly not easy to create a miniaturized tree, and it
can be daunting countless days, months, and years can be
spent learning techniques for creating and maintaining bonsai
and penjing. With practice, you can shape a tree by removing a
branch, allowing one to develop in a desirable location, or
allowing the trunk to grow more.

Balcony view of one of the four rooms at the National Bonsai Exhibition held
in the Tokyo Metropolitan Art Museum. This room has large size bonsai
while the room on the upper left has medium size bonsai.

27

Repotting lets you place the trunk where you’d like in the
pot, wiring lets you alter the position of the branches, and
pruning keeps the branches short. Creating a bonsai from seed
can be tricky. So one popular way is to start by choosing a
nursery tree, shrub, or even a vine, then potting and beginning
to style your bonsai—a step called “pre-bonsai” or “bonsai in
training.” This process of training a plant in a pot takes several
years. With proper care and the appropriate techniques, one
day it may earn the title of “masterpiece.”
While training a
plant, one may need to
replace the original pot
as the tree gets bigger,
and special attention
needs to be given to
drainage and soil mixes
so that the tree
remains healthy. Once
fully formed, a bonsai
will have a thick trunk,
a shape like the
normal-sized tree,
branches of the right
size and in the right
place, leaves that are
as small as they can
get, and a pot
perfectly matched to
the style and color of the tree. This maintenance process
requires years of trimming and restyling, but it’s very satisfying
to the owners and gives a deep sense of artistic pleasure.

Zen and the Art of Bonsai Maintenance

Over the last couple of decades, according to writer Michael
Turley, there has been a dramatic increase in the number of
Westerners who have become involved with bonsai as a hobby.
Many of these people have come to bonsai through an interest
in gardening or horticulture. The idea of growing and refining a
tree in miniature in the confines of a glazed clay pot is
intriguing and found to be a challenge to many who have grown
trees or other plants with success.

29

The art of bonsai needs the knowledge and the technical expertise of the
gardener for the physical bonsai to survive and flourish.

30

For them, bonsai is the next logical step in refining their
horticultural skills. For others, the art of bonsai is what draws
them to the hobby. Instead of using clay or paint or some other
traditional media, plant material is used to create a “living
sculpture”. The “artist” looks at the raw material to “see” the
tree inside, then gradually removes the unnecessary parts to
reveal the prize within. The artist continues the development of
his or her “sculpture” over a period of years through strategic
wiring and pruning, taking great pride in the resulting artistic
“creation”.
However, there is
another aspect or
discipline of bonsai that
rarely gets the attention
it deserves, even though
it has played a significant
role in the evolution of
bonsai design and
display. This third aspect
is “religion” or
“spirituality” – the “soul”
of the art of bonsai.
While our numbers are
fewer than those who
follow the traditional
paths of art or
horticulture, those of us
who follow the “spiritual”
path of bonsai are in
good historical company.
Religion and/or spirituality have a long historical connection to
the development of bonsai, especially in Japan. Bonsai can be
traced back for over ten centuries in China where it was known
as “penjing”.
The term “penjing” included both miniature landscapes and
individual or groups of trees in pots. Penjing was often
practiced by members of the elite or religious communities, so
when penjing, later to be known as “bonsai”, was introduced to
Japan, it was natural for it to come by way of Zen Buddhism,
which was rapidly spreading throughout Asia at that time. In
fact, the name for the “bunjin” or “literati” style of bonsai
comes from the artist class of calligraphers, painters, and

31

Like Christianity, which celebrates a divine trinity, Zen also has its trinities,
especially in its relationship to bonsai. One of these is the three basic
virtues that are needed to create bonsai: shin-zen-bi, or truth, goodness,
and beauty. The trinity is also expressed as a relationship between “god”
or a “universal life energy”, man or the bonsai artist, and nature or the
bonsai itself.

32

poets, often
members of
religious orders,
who were the
early
custodians of
bonsai in Japan.
During this
earliest period
of bonsai in
Japan, the
practice of
bonsai was
almost
exclusively the
domain of
Buddhist monks and their monasteries. Bonsai design underwent
a significant change during this time as the practice of Zen
spread throughout Japan. In China, the Linguan-style of clipand grow was the predominant method of developing and
styling bonsai. However, this changed as the more abstract and
minimalist philosophy of Zen influenced more areas of Japanese
culture.
Like Christianity, which celebrates a divine trinity, Zen also
has its trinities, especially in its relationship to bonsai. One of
these is the three basic virtues that are needed to create
bonsai: shin-zen-bi, or truth, goodness, and beauty. The trinity
is also expressed as a relationship between “god” or a
“universal life energy”, man or the bonsai artist, and nature or
the bonsai itself.
This is mirrored in the traditional “tokonoma” found in most
Japanese homes. In the tokonoma, bonsai are displayed on
stands accompanied by a wall hanging or painting and a viewing
stone or “accompanying plant” on the floor. In this setting, the
painting represents “god” or the “life energy”, the stone or
accompanying plant represent the earth or nature, and the
bonsai itself represents man.
This triad of design continues in the actual structure of the
bonsai tree itself. The trunk is divided into thirds with the first
third absent of branches, the next third containing the first
three main branches, and the final third containing the balance
of the tree including the apex. The first three branches are

33

maintained at different heights, usually circling the trunk from
side to back to opposite side. The remaining branches are also
grouped in threes as they move towards the apex.
The shape of the overall tree reflects the shape of a
triangle with the topmost corner representing the deity, the
lowest corner representing the earth, and the middle corner
representing man between god and nature. The Zen trinity is
further represented in the concepts of “kami”, “wabi”, and
“sabi”. Kami is synonymous with “divinity” and relates to the
inner spirit or life force that inhabits all life forms – human,
animal, and plant.
The concept of wabi and sabi are more elusive to the
Western mind. Wabi refers to an inner peace or tranquility and
the notion of humility when confronting or meditating on nature.
While in the West, man is often placed in the center of the
universe, in Zen, man is just a part of a balanced natural
design. The concept of sabi is even more difficult to understand
for many Westerners. It relates to the pleasure derived from
the tending, loving, and possessing of things that have been
transformed by man, nature, and time.
As these concepts apply to bonsai, the bonsai hobbyist or
enthusiast recognizes that he or she is a part of nature and at
one with nature, and
through meditation on his or
her trees, the bonsaist
reaches deeper into his or
her own soul or spirit to find
fulfillment or enlightenment.
How we come to bonsai is
really immaterial to the
growth of bonsai in the
West.
The art of bonsai needs
the knowledge and the
technical expertise of the
gardener for the physical
bonsai to survive and
flourish. The craft of
growing trees in pots needs
the artist to transform
leaves, bark, roots, and
branches into living works of

35

art. However, the bonsai, and the bonsai artist, is not complete
without the “soul” of bonsai – that recognition of our
relationship to our “creations” and the world around us, the
sun, rain, and elements that nourish our trees – for without this
connection, a bonsai is just a pretty little tree in a pot.

37

Maple

38

2

Acquiring & Caring For Bonsai

A

BONSAI is literally a “tree in a pot,” which further
imitates, in miniature, the appearance of an old tree in
nature. Old specimens in nature, unlike juvenile trees,
have compact rounded tops, and horizontal or drooping
branches, which make them appear aged and graceful. There
are three sizes of bonsai, ranging from under five inches to
about 30 inches in height.
Not all plants are equally effective as bonsai. To produce a
realistic illusion of a mature tree, all parts of the ideal bonsai trunk, branches, twigs, leaves, flowers, fruits, buds, roots should be in perfect proportion with the size of the tree. Plants
used for bonsai should have small leaves or leaves that become
small under bonsai culture. Plants with overly large leaves, such
as the avocado, will look out of proportion if chosen for bonsai.
Sycamores also develop leaves that are too large.
Certain species of both maple and elm trees usually respond
well to bonsai culture and develop leaves that are in proportion.
Among the plants with small leaves and needles appropriate for
bonsai are spruce, pine, zelkova, and pomegranate. Leaves will
miniaturize naturally the longer a tree grows in a shallow
container, but one
must still begin with
a relatively smallleafed type. Plants
chosen for bonsai
should have
attractive bark, and
the trunk must give
the illusion of
maturity.
The trunk should
have girth, but must
remain in proportion
to the entire tree
and should taper
Bonsai material hunters in the Philippines
gradually toward the looking for Pemphis acidula.

39

Plants for bonsai can be collected from the wild, but it is a slow method
and there are many unknown factors. It is difficult to tell the age of a plant
found in the wild and since they must be collected while dormant, it is also
difficult to be sure that the specimen is healthy.

40

top of the tree. An ideal trunk has good buttress rootage at the
base, and graceful movement as it rises to the apex. Branches
that occur lower down on the trunk should be the longest, and
biggest in diameter, with branches growing higher on the trunk
becoming successively shorter and smaller in diameter. This
imitates the natural appearance of a tree, suggesting that the
lowest branches are the oldest (biggest/longest), and higher
branches, having grown more recently, are smaller and shorter.
Most bonsai trees sold at garden centers and nurseries are
of excellent quality,
but there are a few
points to bear in mind
when buying a new
plant.
• Age and shape
of the tree
• General health
• Soil should be
damp but not soggy,
unless it has just
been watered
• Leaves should
look bright and
healthy, not burnt
around the edges or
spotty
• If buying a
deciduous tree in
winter, last year’s
growth should be
smooth and plump,
with no sign of bark
wrinkling
• The tree should be steady in its container, which should
have at least one drainage hole
• A white fungus in and around the drainage hole is natural
and harmless

Creating Your Own Bonsai

Plant Selection. It is safest to begin with common plants
that do well in your area. Be sure that the plants you consider
meet the requirements for good bonsai. Some old favorites for

41

bonsai specimens are Sargent juniper (Juniperus chinensis
‘Sargentii’), Japanese black pine (Pinus thunbergiana), Japanese
wisteria (Wisteria floribunda), Chinese wisteria (Wisteria
sinensis), Japanese flowering cherry (Prunus yedoensis), and
Japanese or sawleaf zelkova (Zelkova serrata).
Nursery stock can be a very good selection since the plant’s
roots have already become accustomed to being containerized.
Look for well-rooted specimens with good branches. Plants for
bonsai can be collected from the wild, but it is a slow method
and there are many unknown factors. It is difficult to tell the
age of a plant found in the wild and since they must be
collected while
dormant, it is also
difficult to be sure
that the specimen is
healthy.
Take all the
equipment needed to
keep the plant in good
condition after
digging. This includes
plastic bags to wrap
the root ball, moss to
pack around the
roots, and water to
keep the specimen
moist if it cannot be
replanted soon after
digging. Don’t forget the crowbar; roots are sometimes wrapped
securely around rocks. Be sure to have permission before
digging plants on property other than your own, and don’t
forget to check the endangered species list for protected
plants before you begin. It is not legal to take plants from
national parks and other conserved areas. After the plant is
selected, dug, and brought home, plant it in a protected area in
your garden. Water the plant and feed it sparingly.
After one year, it is ready to be placed in a training
container. A light pruning of the branches can take place at
potting time, but training should not begin for another year. It is
possible to propagate your own bonsai. It is a slow method, but
it has the advantage of letting you shape the plant from the
very beginning. Plant seedlings in the ground outside so that

43

Most bonsai are hardy trees and shrubs whose natural habitat is out in the
open. They are not permanent houseplants; and even semi-tropical trees
should be placed outside when weather permits.

44

the trunks will develop rapidly. They may need to stay outdoors
for two to five years. Each spring, dig up the plant and prune
its roots as you would if it were potted.
Bonsai can also be started from cuttings. Make cuttings in
late spring before the buds open. Some plants that propagate
easily from cuttings are olive, willow, cotoneaster, firethorn,
azalea, and boxwood. Plants can also be propagated by layering
and grafting, but these methods are not recommended for the
beginner.

Purchasing A Tree

When buying a tree from a store during the summer, be sure
to give it at least two weeks outside, avoiding heavy rain and
high winds before displaying it indoors. If purchasing in winter,
however, do not allow it to be exposed to frost for the rest of
the season, as it will probably have begun to shoot. This is
most important with deciduous trees, and while varieties of
junipers are very
hardy it is as well not
to take any chances.
Most bonsai are
hardy trees and
shrubs whose natural
habitat is out in the
open. They are not
permanent
houseplants; and
even semi-tropical
trees should be
placed outside when
weather permits.
During the summer
the plant must be able to carry out the process of
photosynthesis, and during winter it is resting and building up
its strength for the coming spring. Too long in a warm room will
persuade it that spring has arrived early and it will start
budding. If this happens more than once, the tree will simply die
of exhaustion.

Sunlight

Sunlight is critical for a tree’s good health, but how much is
best? For most conifers – spruces, pines, junipers, tamarack,

45

For many broadleaf, deciduous trees full morning sun and partial afternoon
sun is best.

46

etc. – full sun is best. For many broadleaf, deciduous trees full
morning sun and partial afternoon sun is best. In general trees
with thick coarse leaves will tolerate more sun than those with
thin, delicate leaves. As an example of the later, the Japanese
maple, full sun can desiccate the leaf margins, so these grow
best in filtered sunlight.
Sunlight, especially the ultra-violet ray, affects the growth
of trees. Therefore, except inspecial cases such as immediately
after repotting, extensive trimming, etc, bonsai should be
placed in a sunny location. Bright light will also work well but
the tree should not be placed more than 12" away from the
direct light source. An east, west or southern exposure works
best. A northern exposure will require the use of “grow lights”
which should remain on up to 16 hours each day and the lamp
should not be more than two inches from the top of the tree.
Incandescent light is too hot and will not provide the various
spectrum of light that is required to maintain your bonsai tree.
If you do not have a window or light source that provides an
east, west or southern exposure, be sure to select a bonsai
tree that does well in lower lighting conditions.

47

All bonsai trees are grown in special bonsai potting mix – not dirt, not
potting soil, and not garden soil. This special bonsai soil is coarse and
granular, and should allow for water to freely run through it.

48

Watering

Watering is the
single most important
factor in keeping your
trees alive. It is also
the hardest skill to
learn. This is because
various species of
trees have different
water demands. Some
trees tolerate dry
conditions better than
others. Some trees
will tell you when they
are thirsty when their
leaves look limp. For
other trees limp leaves mean the tree has already died.
So where do we start? All bonsai trees are grown in special
bonsai potting mix – not dirt, not potting soil, and not garden
soil. This special bonsai soil is coarse and granular, and should
allow for water to freely run through it. All bonsai pots have
holes for drainage. When bonsai are watered, most of the water
runs out the bottom of the pot, and only a small amount is
retained in the pot. If a bonsai is growing in a free draining soil
mix, during the active growing period (spring to fall) they are
usually watered once a day.
Water your bonsai with a watering can, or with an
attachment to your garden hose that will deliver a gentle spray
of water. Be careful you do not blast the soil from the pot with
too strong a spray. Water until water runs from the bottom of
the pot. Watering is best done in the morning so the tree and
soil are fully hydrated during the hottest part of the day. It is
often said that it is impossible to over-water a bonsai if it is in a
good potting mix. However, down and become more compacted,
the pot will not drain as freely as it once did.
So some trees may require water today and others not. You
should check to see if your bonsai need water by gently probing
with your finger slightly below the soil surface to check for
moisture. Do not water if the soil is still moist. However, do not
let the soil become bone dry. Some bonsai growers insert a
short section of wooden chopstick near the edge of the pot. To

49

Because bonsai trees are cultivated in limited amounts of soil, adequate
feed is very important. As a general rule, a small amount of feed is given in
the spring and a larger amount in the fall.

50

check moisture simply withdraw the chopstick and examine it
for moisture. Then replace it again. Most conifers generally
don’t like their roots to be wet all the time and tolerate dry
conditions better than broadleaf trees. Smaller pots will require
more frequent watering than larger pots. Wind, humidity, pot
size, temperature, and soil compaction all are factors in how
often you should water. When you go on vacation have a
reliable neighbor water your trees.
Unlike a houseplant, bonsai trees use a “free draining” type
of soil because their roots cannot tolerate “wet feet”. In
addition, they are
grown in significantly
less soil and,
therefore require more
watering. Factors
such as tree location,
temperature, lighting
conditions, quantity
of soil used, and the
changing seasons will
determine the
frequency of
watering. You can get
to know when your
tree needs to be
watered by observing
the foliage, testing
the soil with your
index finger just below
the surface, or just
by the weight of the
pot. (The drier the
tree, the lighter it will
feel.) To take the guesswork out of watering, an inexpensive
moisture meter which works very much like a thermometer
comes in handy. Insert it into the soil and the movement of the
needle will tell you if it is time to water.
Rainwater is best for watering plants, but tap water that
has stood for a few hours is adequate. In summer, trees should
be watered in the early morning or late afternoon to avoid the
midday heat. This will prevent the leaves of the finer bonsai
from burning. In winter, water early to permit any excess to

51

All potted plants will eventually
outgrow their containers. While
houseplants need to be “pottedup”, that is, placed in larger and
larger containers, the miniaturization of a bonsai trees is
maintained by keeping the roots
confined to the small container.

52

drain before the night frost. Plunging the pot into a bowl to
soak is ideal for recently potted trees, small collections and for
trees that have dried out. Be sure to drain properly, however!

Misting

All trees grow in more humid conditions than our homes,
offices and dormitories. So what can we do to provide this
essential humidity ? Misting the tree is only beneficial for a
short time, so what we recommend is to place the tree on a
humidity tray and add water to the tray. As the water in the
tray evaporates it creates a humid environment around the tree
24 hours a day.
When the water in
the tray is gone,
add more water.
It’s a good idea to
separate the pot
from the water in
the tray by adding
some pebbles to
the bottom of the
tray. This will
prevent any roots
from sitting in the
water.

Fertilizing

Because bonsai
trees are cultivated
in limited amounts
of soil, adequate
feed is very
important. As a
general rule, a small
amount of feed is given in the spring and a larger amount in the
fall. Feed for bonsai should contain three principle ingredients;
nitrogen, phosphoric acid, and potash. It is also a good idea to
use a fertilizer containing “chelated” iron. Water before
fertilizing your tree and then apply at half the strength
recommended by the brand’s manufacturer. Rotate the use of
brands since different manufacturers add different amounts of
trace elements and minerals. You could also add Superthrive,

53

On average, repotting will be necessary every 3-5 years, but the tree
should be removed from its container and its root system inspected once a
year.

54

which is a vitamin supplement to the fertilizer mix. You may find
it simpler and easier to use slow release fertilizer granules
(placed over the soil) whose nutrients are released with each
watering.

Repotting

Repotting must be done periodically to keep your bonsai
healthy. Trimming the roots prevents the tree from becoming
pot bound and also stimulates new root growth. For almost all
varieties of bonsai, repotting is best done in the spring just as
the plant is awaking from dormancy. Most bonsai need to have
this done every two or three or four years. Older trees require
less frequent potting than younger trees; conifers require
repotting less often than broadleaf deciduous trees.
To repot a bonsai the tree is carefully removed from its pot
(there may be a wire anchoring it in place. Cut this wire and
remove it.). The roots are then carefully combed out with a
root hook. Trim off the
root ends enough so
that it will fit back
into the same pot.
Replace the soil with
new bonsai potting
mix. Secure the tree
in its pot with wire to
anchor it in place. A
tree that wiggles in its
pot will have difficulty
growing new roots.
Newly repotted trees
should not be exposed to full sun and drying winds until the
roots are actively taking up water.
All potted plants will eventually outgrow their containers.
While houseplants need to be “potted-up”, that is, placed in
larger and larger containers, the miniaturization of a bonsai
trees is maintained by keeping the roots confined to the small
container. On average, repotting will be necessary every three
to five years, but the tree should be removed from its container
and its root system inspected once a year. If the roots form a
circular ball around the perimeter of the pot, it is time to trim
the roots and repot.

55

The main objective of trimming
and pruning is to shape the
bonsai into the desired form and
to reduce growth above ground
in order to maintain a balance
with root growth.

56

When repotting remember to:
• Use only bonsai soil
• Remove air pockets by working the soil down through the
roots
• Do not remove more that 20% of the root system
• Repot during the appropriate repotting season
• Water well and keep out of the sun for a week or two

Trimming & Pruning

The main objective of trimming and pruning is to shape the
bonsai into the desired form and to reduce growth above
ground in order to maintain a balance with root growth. The
process of shaping begins when the tree is very young and is
on-going as it continues its growth. Trimming is accomplished
by using a sharp scissors or shears. This traditional tool is
called butterfly
shears or bonsai
shears and is used
for removing foliage
and light branches.
When heavier
branches are
removed, we call it
pruning and the tool
to use is the
concave cutter, for
which there is no
substitute. The
concave cutter
allows you to remove
small, medium and
even large branches
without leaving any
visible scars. Some
trees such as the
Juniper should be
trimmed by using the
thumb and index
finger to remove new
growth and to
prevent browning

57

Bonsai from forest
trees must live
outdoors except for
short periods of time
when they may be
brought inside for
viewing.

58

and a “sheared” appearance.

Pests & Diseases

Many, if not most, insects are not harmful to your bonsai.
Some are beneficial in that they prey on insects that will do
damage to your trees. If you find that harmful insects have
taken up residence on your bonsai, you need to take action.
Many of these can be washed or picked off. Many are small and
difficult to see. Red spider mites are frequently a problem with
junipers, and can be discerned by holding a white piece of
paper below a branch and tapping on the branch. If you see
what looks like moving red paprika, you have a spider mite
problem. Treat with
an appropriate
insecticide. Be sure to
read all labels and
application
instructions for any
pesticide. To do
otherwise is a
violation of federal
law. As living trees,
bonsai are susceptible
to insect attacks and
disease. Preventive
and corrective
measures include:
• Keeping your
bonsai in good health, since insects and bacteria tend to attack
weak trees
• Giving your tree ample light, fresh air and ventilation
• Keeping the soil free of spent blooms and fallen leaves
etc. You may also use an insecticidal soap spray which is not
harmful to humans or animals. This soap derivative, however,
may require more than one application to control the insect
population. It’s also a good idea to use this spray weekly to
prevent any attacks.
Just remember that bonsai from forest trees must live
outdoors except for short periods of time when they may be
brought inside for viewing. These indoor periods should only be
for two or three hours and should not occur at all in summer
unless the interior is well ventilated. In the summer, bonsai need

59

Tropical and subtropical trees can be
grown as indoor
bonsai. A few hobbyists grow these
indoors all year long
with supplemental
lighting.

60

cool nights, sunny days, and mist or rain almost daily. If your
climate does not offer these conditions naturally, you must
supply them. Avoid any extremes in temperature, light, rain, and
wind. Water the entire plant daily, but do not let them become
water logged. Placing
bonsai on a slatted
stand in the garden is
a good way to keep
drainage conditions
optimum.
Learn the
conditions (culture)
that your bonsai
requires. Junipers and
pines need full sun all
day. Maples, elms and
boxwoods need
morning sun and
afternoon shade, etc.
Apply fertilizer only
before and during
active growth. A
houseplant fertilizer
diluted from one quarter to one half strength will suffice. In the
fall, bonsai must be prepared for the winter. Slow the growth of
the plants by watering less frequently and discontinuing
fertilizer application. Do not prune or cut any branches after
mid-August.
Winter’s low temperatures and drying winds can easily kill
bonsai. If the winter temperature drops below 28º F, bonsai
must be protected by a greenhouse, pit, or coldframe. However,
do not overprotect the plants; they must be kept cool to stay
dormant. Don’t forget to water them while inside the coldframe.
Winter watering may be necessary only once a week. More
bonsai are killed by over-watering than by desiccation.
A dormant period is necessary for all temperate trees, and
trees that are not given this period of rest will die. This does
not apply to tropical or sub-tropical varieties, which are
described on the next page. The type of winter protection
needed by your trees depends on the type of tree that you
have and the severity of winter in your area. If you live in an
area where the coldest night temperatures in the winter are no

61

62

colder than about mid twenties Fahrenheit – typically the deep
south - your trees will not need any special protection, and can
remain on their benches all winter. But for most regions of the
United States your trees will require winter protection of some
sort. This can be accomplished by placing your tree in an
unheated garage; an unheated shed; a cold frame; a window
well on the north facing side of your house; a root cellar; by
healing them into a flower bed; by carefully burying them in
light snow. Wherever you store your bonsai, they should not be
subjected to repeated cycles of freeze-thaw. A sun porch that
gets warm during the day and freezing at night would not be a
favorable location.
Also check periodically during the winter months to see if
the tree needs to be watered. Other bonsai growers in your
area are a good source of information regarding winter care.
In the spring, start new bonsai, prune the old ones, and
continue training measures. The remaining part of the growing
season is used for the plants’ adjustments to these practices.
The rule-of-thumb is, if the soil is still wet – don’t water.

Indoor Bonsai

Tropical and sub-tropical trees can be grown as indoor
bonsai. A few hobbyists grow these indoors all year long with
supplemental lighting. But even these trees will do best if they
are grown outdoors during the normal growing season. When
night temperatures drop below 50 degrees Fahrenheit, these
trees need to be brought indoors. Tropical environments receive
about 12 hours of daylight all year long. Indoors, give your
bonsai as much light as possible, perhaps supplemented with
grow lights set on a timer to mimic natural conditions.
Most of our homes have a low relative humidity during the
winter. Misting the foliage, or grouping your plants together, or
placing pans of gravel and water under, or near, your bonsai will
help raise the humidity. Remember, however, your bonsai pot
must never be sitting in water deeper than the feet on the pot.
The water level must never be above the bottom of the pot.

63

The most popular bonsai styles today are the simple but
relaxed forms.

64

3

Styles Of Bonsai Trees

B

onsai trees and plants vary greatly in style and size.
Miniature specimens, up to 6 inches tall, are usually
naturally dwarf plants trained even smaller. Small
bonsai stand up to 12 inches tall, and medium trees from 1 – 2
1/2 feet. Bonsai do not have to be small however, with some
magnificent trees at the Imperial Palace in Tokyo growing more
than six feet tall. These plants are hundreds of years old! The
most important classification of style refers to the angle at
which the trunk stands in the container. These range from the
formal upright style, in which the trunk grows straight and
vertical, to the full cascade, in which the bonsai tree is trained
so that the upper growth sweeps down below the pot. The
most popular bonsai styles today are the simple but relaxed
forms such as the informal upright and leaning styles, together
with small groups.

BONSAI STYLES

In the Japanese bonsai tradition, each bonsai must conform
to a clearly defined style. There are more than 100 recognized
styles in bonsai, but most experts consider five basic styles to
be essential — formal upright, informal upright, slanting,
cascade and semi-cascade. This guide will help you become
familiar with the essential bonsai styles and
their Japanese names.
Formal Upright (Chokkan) - A bonsai
tree trained in the formal upright style mimics
the growth of a tree under perfect natural
conditions. The most important requirement
for this style is that the trunk must be
perfectly straight, tapering naturally and
evenly from bottom to top. The best species
for training in the formal upright style are larches, junipers,
pines and spruces because of their naturally tapered shape.

65

At the outdoor sales area of the Ueno Green Club bonsai (Japan),
prebonsai, containers, tools, soil and seeds can be found for sale. Note
many of the large size bonsai on the roof are sold as bare-root specimens.

66

Informal Upright (Moyogi) - In
nature, trees bend or change their
growth direction in response to their
environment. They might grow away
from the wind or other trees, or grow
toward sunlight. The informal upright
bonsai style represents this natural
curve of a tree trunk in an imperfect
environment. In the informal upright
style, the top of the tree, its apex, is
usually positioned directly over its
base, so the overall effect is that of an
upright tree. Most species of sturdy
plants are suitable for training in this style, but the most
popular are maples.
Slanting (Shakkan) - Trees slant naturally as a result of
exposure to buffeting winds or deep shade when they are
young. A bonsai tree trained in this
style displays a trunk that leans to
the left or right to imply a difficult
childhood. Some bonsai trees that
have been trained to slant look as if
they will fall over because of the
angle at which they lean. No need to
worry, though – these trees have
strong roots growing under the soil
that support the tree’s weight. The
slanting bonsai style is similar to the
informal upright, but in this style the tree’s apex is not directly
over its base.
Cascade (Kengai) - The cascade style of bonsai calls to
mind a weather-beaten old tree clinging
to a cliff face. In this style, the tree’s
growing tip extends below the base of
its container. A cascade bonsai appears
to be struggling against gravity or
seeking out scant sunlight. The semicascade (han-kengai) bonsai style is
similar to the cascade style. In this
form, the tree grows over the rim of the

67

68

69

Juniper bonsai being airlayered

70

container but does not drop below the container’s base. Many
species of plants will adapt to cascade training, as long as they
are not strongly upright naturally. Juniper is a favorite for
training in the cascade and semi-cascade styles.
Broom (Hokidachi) - A broom-style bonsai looks like a
conventional handmade broom, turned upside down. Branches
fan out from the top of a single straight trunk. This style
imitates one of the common natural shapes of trees. Because
the broom shape is so common in nature, broom-style bonsai
trees are often considered to be the most realistic-looking. The
broom style, though,
is considered an
advanced technique
and is difficult to
achieve. Deciduous
trees are the best
candidates for training
in this style,
especially those with
fine branches and
leaves. The elm is the
most popular species
of tree used for
growing and training
in the broom style.
Windswept
(Fukinagashi) - The
windswept bonsai has all of its living branches facing the same
direction, a training method creating the illusion of a tree that
grew up in a very windy place. When done well, windswept
bonsai trees can look as if they are still being lashed by the
wind. The windswept effect can be applied to basic bonsai
styles of trees, including formal or informal upright, slanting or
semi-cascade trees. You may see a bonsai that fits into more
than one styling category because of a combination of
techniques The windswept style is most effectively applied to
conifer species of trees. The effect is more difficult to achieve
convincingly with deciduous trees because their leaves face in
all directions.

71

Ficus eugenoides

72

Forest (Yose-ue) - Forest-style bonsai plantings consist of
several trees of the same species growing in a single pot. In the
Japanese tradition, trees are always planted in odd-numbered
groups that are said to echo the randomness of nature.
Although a bonsai forest is viewed from outside, the style is
meant to give the viewer the sensation of actually being within
a forest.

73

Juniperus phoeniacea thurbinatta

74

4

Shaping the Bonsai

B

efore deciding on the shape of your bonsai, study the
tree carefully and take into account the natural form
of the species. To achieve an impression of age and
reality, observe the way mature trees of the same kind grow in
their natural setting. Decide on the final shape and size of your
bonsai before beginning. Make a rough sketch of what you wish
to create, and use it as a guide.
Bonsai are shaped by pruning, wiring and pinching. Pruning
and wiring create the tree’s structure by shaping its woody
parts, whereas pinching
back the long ends of soft
foliage helps side buds to
develop, making a branch
bushier or twiggier (this is
called “ramification”).
Pruning is less stressful
for the tree than wiring,
but both are usually
necessary to achieve
refinement. Pruning should
be done with a concave
cutter, a special bonsai
tool for making sharp cuts
without collars (stubs). All
but maintenance pruning should be done at the same time of
year as root pruning in order to maintain a supply-and-demand
balance between foliage and roots.
Deciduous trees can be pruned back quite severely if an
equivalent amount of root is removed at the same time. Older
evergreens should be pruned back very gradually. Starting at
the bottom of the trunk, remove branches that are growing
straight up, those that grow inward towards the trunk, and one
of two branches that grow opposite one another, after selecting
the correct one to keep, usually according to an alternating
(side-to-side) arrangement of branches that start near the

75

bottom. Only after wiring should you prune to shorten remaining
branches, leaving lower ones longer than upper ones.
Wiring can be done at any time of year, but it is most easily
done on deciduous trees in the winter when they have no
leaves. Buy annealed aluminum or
copper wire made for use on bonsai,
which is much more pliable than regular
wire. To make the branches flexible
before wiring, do not water the plant
the day before you wire it. Begin at the
bottom of the tree when wiring and
shaping, and work upward. Anchor the
end of the wire at the base of the tree
by pushing it into the soil.
Use foam pads under the wire to
protect the branches. Keep turns
around the branches or trunk about one quarter inch apart, and
spiral upward at a 45 degree angle. Do not wire too tightly. If a
branch should snap, the ends can be rejoined if not completely
broken. Wind some garden tape around the break. If a branch
snaps off, prune it back at the first side branch. Wire should
not be kept on the plant longer than one growing season. When
removing wire, start at the end of the branch and work back
carefully.

How To Prune Bonsai Trees

Bonsai trees need training throughout their lives in order to:
(1) Maintain the small size of a naturally large tree
(2) Give the plant an appearance of age and maturity

Pruning Tools

Pruning instruments should always
be sharp and clean because blunt tools
will leave a ragged stump, which could
easily become a doorway for disease
and pests. Heavy pruning cuts should
be whittled down to a slight hollow in
the trunk or branch in order to
encourage the formation of a callous.
Large cuts should be painted with
protective paint. When pruning a
branch, try to make the cut just above

76

a bud that is pointing in the direction you want the branch to
grow. If the cut slopes downwards, then the water will run off
and the chances of rot will be considerably lessened.

Main branch pruning

Heavy pruning should be carried out in autumn, winter, or
early spring, and is the major way of shaping a bonsai tree. The
main priorities are to remove any branch that is too low at the
front any branch directly opposite another any that creates a
so-called cartwheel effect and any that crosses the front or
back to the other side of the tree. Hollow out all stumps with a
sharp knife .

General Pruning

Throughout the growing season, cut back shoots of maples
zelkovas and other broad-leaves to the first or second pair of
leaves. Pinch out the tips of juniper shoots . With pines,
remove the center “candles” and pinch back the others.

Leaf Cutting

Do this in early summer on deciduous trees that do not
flower or fruit. Use sharp scissors to remove half of each leaf
on weak branches or trees, but all but the stalk on strong
wood. In a few weeks the stalk will drop and new small foliage
and shoots will grow.

77

78

5

How To Train Your Bonsai

O

ften considered the most difficult training technique,
wiring is used to bend the trunk and branches of a
tree into the shape you would like your bonsai to
take. Beginners can learn to judge tension in different sized
branches, and the various ways of securing wire, by first
practicing on a small branch
from an ordinary tree or
shrub. Never rush.
Deciding the shape your
tree will take is a lifetime
decision, so be sure to
examine all angles and
possibilities. Copper wire,
though expensive, is most
suitable for wiring a bonsaito-be such as the juniper
above, because it remains
soft. Galvanized iron or
plastic coated wire may be used, but they tend to look rather
ugly and detract from your tree. Remember, the larger
coniferous trees will be wearing their wires for 12 - 18 months,
so please take care in choosing the best “look” for your bonsai.
If you study very carefully the way trees grow in nature, it
is possible to design a realistic looking bonsai without knowing
the names of styles, etc. The most important part is always
remember that you are working with a living plant. Look
carefully at its natural characteristics and you may discern
within them a suitable style, or styles. Once a certain “shape”
begins to reveal itself, you will find that gentle bending of a
branch before wiring will increase its flexibility and give you an
idea of the correct strength of wire. What you are looking for is
a wire that will give you a tension slightly more than the

79

tension of the
branch. Tenderbarked trees,
such as maples,
should be trained
with paperwrapped wire to
protect the bark.

When To
Wire

Deciduous
trees should be
wired after their
leaves have matured, in early summer, and the wires removed in
autumn to avoid wounding the bark. Coniferous trees should be
wired during the winter months, since they take considerably
longer to become fixed in position. All trees should be protected
from hot sun and heavy rain for a month after wiring.

Wiring A Bonsai Tree

Begin wiring from the base of the trunk, anchoring the wire
in the soil. You may need two wires to hold the trunk in
position. After securing the base of the trunk, proceed to the
main, and then the smaller branches, ending with the highest
twigs. Wires should be wound at about 45 degrees to the line
of the branch. Gauge the tension carefully, as tight wiring will
cut into the bark, and loose wiring will slip.

Bonsai Wiring Rules

1. Size of the wire is 1/3 the size of the branch for copper
wire. Aluminum wire is slightly larger.
2. Apply wire at a 45 degree angle to the branch. 50
degrees is better.
3. Spiral gap between wire loops should be equal.
4. Spiral should be closer to the way the branch bends.
Never leave gaps between wire and branch.
5. Change the thickness of the wire as the branch thickness
changes.
6. Wire heaviest wire first to the thinnest wire.
7. Wire 2 branches with one piece of wire, not far apart or
too close.

81

Top view of a section of the bonsai exhibition. Here one can study the
placement of each bonsai display and also the overall silhouette of each
masterpiece.

82

8. End of the wire always faces backward and upward. End
of the wire faces upward to support the tip (bud) of the
branch.
9. Positioning of your hands and body is fundamental to
wiring because it is important to achieve the 45 degree angle of
wire placement.
10. Hold branches underneath when wiring.
11. Hold wire from the end to keep wiring hand free of the
tree and not to disturb buds. Hand tension holds the branch
bottom while the other hand holds the wire.
12. The left hand is stiff
while the right hands are
loose when wiring (Right
handed people).
13. Never move both
hands at the same time.
Move inside to outside
when wiring.
14. Over wire thick
branches and under wire
thin branches.
15. Wire on the outside
of the branch where
pressure is to be applied.
16. Always support the
weakest part of the branch
when bending.
17. Wire from the
thickest branch to the
thinnest branch.
18. Wire from the
bottom of the tree to the
top of the tree.
19. Start wiring from
the inside to the outside of the branch.
20. Always bend the branch first, not the wire.
21. Wire the branch to bend it in the direction of your
intended movement, i.e. wire on top to bend the branch
downward, wire on the bottom to bend the branch upward, wire
the back to bend the branch forward, and wire the front to
bend the branch backward.
22. Wiring at the branch junction is very important.

83

84

23. Crossing wires should be avoided. This causes gaps
between wire and the branch and it could result in damaging
parts of the tree when underneath wires are removed.

Dealing With Breaks

Even if you are very careful, you may bend a branch to its
breaking point while wiring. If the break is simply a fracture with
the broken part still partially attached, you have a chance of
saving the branch. Very gently ease the broken part into place,
carefully fitting both ends of the break together. Wrap the
break with garden tape or raffia and tie it securely, but not too
tightly. Within several months, the fractured branch tissue may
knit together. If the break is complete or the ends fail to unite,
you have several
choices. You can cut
the broken branch
back to where side
branches grow out
from it, or you can
cut it back to its
point of origin.

Care After
Wiring

To help your
bonsai recover from
the trauma of wiring,
keep it out of direct
sunlight for several
days. It’s also a good
idea to keep it
sheltered from wind
for several weeks. Water the plant routinely, giving the foliage a
daily sprinkling.

Removing The Wire

To give wired branches a good chance to grow into their
new positions, leave wires in place for a full growing season.
Then, in early autumn, remove them to avoid any constriction
during the next growth phase. If wires are left in place too
long, the bark will show unsightly spiral scars for years. With
stiff copper wire, it is best to cut it carefully from branches to

85

All bonsai begin their development in training pots, where they stay until
they have a good, fibrous root system and relatively full foliage development which make them look like bonsai rather than just a shrub or tree in a
pot. Training pots help trees grown for bonsai make the transition between
a deep nursery container, a balled and burlapped root system, or landscape, to the shallow confinement of a bonsai pot.

86

avoid inflicting damage by uncoiling. Aluminum wire can be
uncoiled, starting at the outmost end and carefully uncoiling
toward the anchor end. If wired branches still need more
coaxing to achieve the desired positions, they can be rewired
at the appropriate time for another year of training. When you
rewire a branch, vary the wire position from that of the
previous year.

87

All bonsai pots have large drainage holes, which are essential for the rapid
drainage that promotes root health

88

6

Additional Training Techniques

B

efore wiring became standard practice, bonsai
practitioners manipulated the shapes of their plants in
other ways. These methods lack the relative
unobtrusiveness of wire, but they are still effective training
techniques.

Bending Branches

If you need to make a simple downward bend in a branch,
there are three reasonably easy ways to do it:
1. Tying to the trunk: Branches too stiff to bend by wiring
can often be bent by tying. You simply attach wire to the
branch, bend the branch down and tie the wire to the trunk.
You can use a thinner
gauge of wire for tying than
for wiring a bend. Encircle
the branch with a loose
wire loop, protecting the
wood by slipping padding
(such as cloth, paper, or
rubber) between the branch
and the wire. Also place
padding between the wire
and the trunk where the
wire exerts pressure
against the trunk. Make the
bend gradually in order to
avoid breaking the limb.
Start by pulling the limb
about 1/3 of the way
toward its desired position.
After two - three months,
bend the branch a bit more,
and then give it more time

89

The Ueno Green Club (Japan) on the left is the three story headquarters for
the Japan Bonsai Cooperative where exhibits, auctions, sales and meetings are held. During the National Bonsai Exhibition the parking lot is
transformed into a sales area, in addition to all three levels of the building.

90

to adjust to that position. Repeat this process until you
eventually achieve the bend you desire.
2. Tying to the container: You can also wire branches to the
plant’s container to pull them downward. Loop a strand of wire
under the pot and up over the soil, then tie the ends together
snugly. Now run a separate loop of padded wire from each
branch that you wish to bend down to the wire that goes
across the pot. Pull down on the wire until the branch is in the
position you want, then secure the branch wire to the pot wire.
As with the previous method, it’s best to do this in gradual
stages so that the branch doesn’t break.
3. Weighting a branch: A third way to bend a branch down
is to attach a weight to it. Fishing weights suspended from the
branch by a string are traditional, but any object heavy enough
to exert the desire pressure will work. Choose the weight with
care - if it’s too heavy, it may break the branch. Don’t use this
method if you bonsai plant is in a breezy location: in a wind,
weighted branches can pump up and down to the breaking
point.

Spreading & Snugging

If your bonsai has a pair of branches or trunks that are
either too close together or too far
apart and you can’t separate them
by wiring, these two training
methods off a simple solution to
the problem.
Spreading: a simple wedge
can permanently spread apart two
branches that are growing too
close. This works particularly well
to separate parallel trunks and
forked branches. Take a small piece
of wood, cut it into a triangular or
trapezoidal shape, and gently
wedge it between the limbs until
they are separated as far as you
want. Be very careful when
separating forked branches; too
much pressure can cause a split
down the fork. Remove the wedge
after 4 months. If the branches

91

If you grow just a few bonsai plants, you will have no
problem displaying them. All you need is something that
elevates the pots so that you can view them from the
front rather than from the top down.

92

return to their original
positions, put the
wedge back in place.
Eventually the
branches will lose
their tendency to
spring back when you
take away the
wedge.
Snugging: to
bring branches closer,
especially parallel
ones, loop a soft
cord or a small belt
around them and pull
them into the desired
position. Or form a
piece of sturdy wire into an “S” shape, hooking each branch
into one of the curves of the “S”. In time, the branches will
stay in place on their own.

Bonsai Containers

All bonsai begin their development in training pots, where
they stay until they have a good, fibrous root system and
relatively full foliage development which make them look like
bonsai rather than just a shrub or tree in a pot. Training pots
help trees grown for bonsai make the transition between a deep
nursery container, a balled and burlapped root system, or
landscape, to the shallow confinement of a bonsai pot.
Above all, resist the urge to collect (dig) a tree and put it
directly into a bonsai pot, where its chances of survival are
slight. The best sort of training pot is often a large-diameter
nursery container with good drainage holes, and with its top cut
off to a depth of eight to 10 inches. During its time in a training
pot, the tree should be grown in coarse, fast-draining soil.
Traditional bonsai pots, available at bonsai nurseries, and some
large nurseries and import stores, are round, oval, square,
rectangular or hexagonal. Some are unglazed on the exterior
(traditional for evergreens) and some are glazed and are
suitable for most types of trees, as long as the pot

93

94

complements but does not compete with the tree. Pots for
cascade, semi-cascade and flowering bonsai are deeper than
others.
All bonsai pots have large drainage holes, which are
essential for the rapid drainage that promotes root health, but
which must be covered with screening on the inside bottom of
the pot to prevent coarse soil from washing away with draining
water. Bonsai containers should be unglazed on their inside
walls, and on the bottoms, both inside and out.
Before repotting, familiarize yourself with the proper time of
year to repot specific types of trees. For example, junipers can
be repotted at any time during the growing season because
they grow throughout
it. Pines and most
other evergreens
must be repotted
during the late winter
before they show
signs of new growth.
Most deciduous trees
should be repotted
before they leaf out in
very early spring. A
bonsai that is ready
for a bonsai pot
should not be
transplanted into it
until all foliage work
(pruning, wiring,
pinching) has been
completed.
This precaution
prevents the tree’s newly placed roots from being dislodged. At
the time of “potting up,” turn the bonsai container so that its
front side (essentially the same for all shapes except
rectangular, in which case only one of the two long sides should
be the front) is toward you roughly at eye-level. Hold the tree
with its front view toward you and place the base of the trunk
very slightly off-center to the opposite side from which the
dominant visual weight of its branches occurs.
In other words, if most branches occur on the left when
viewing the tree from the front, place the base of the trunk

95

Keeping your collection of bonsai trees on a
stand makes them easier to work with and to
see, and gives protection from extremes of
weather.

96

slightly off-center to the right. This maintains the asymmetrical
balance that is the basis of Japanese design. Comb out the
roots, pruning back (shortening) those that have become wiry
or stiff deep in the soil. Keep, but trim, fibrous roots and spread
them out inside the container. Add coarse porous soil such as
Turface (a soil amendment), or “soilless soil,” which can be
purchased at large landscape supply businesses. Water the tree
thoroughly and keep it in a dry protected place for the next few
days. Check it for soil moisture daily, but do not water it until
the soil on top begins to feel a bit dry.

97

In the tokonoma, bonsai are displayed on stands accompanied by a wall
hanging or painting and a viewing stone or “accompanying plant” on the
floor. In this setting, the painting represents “god” or the “life energy”, the
stone or accompanying plant represent the earth or nature, and the bonsai
itself represents man.

98

7

Displaying Your Bonsai Outdoors

R

emember that simplicity is very important in Japanese
aesthetics and bonsai should be displayed in an
uncluttered environment where the details of the plant
can be appreciated. This is, after all, a wonder of nature trees and shrubs made miniature. Gravel beds in the garden are
good backgrounds for bonsai outdoors, and a simple stand or
table before a blank wall makes an appropriate setting indoors.
Make sure that the front view faces the viewer. Your beautiful
bonsai can greatly benefit by the right setting.

Outdoor Display

If you grow just a few bonsai plants, you will have no
problem displaying them. All you need is something that
elevates the pots so that you can view them from the front
rather than from the top down. A patio bench, for example, will
accommodate one or several bonsai plants, and can also define
the edge of a deck or serve as seating.

Benches and Shelves

You can put together a simple bonsai bench in a matter of
minutes. Select a sturdy wooden plank, such as a 2 x 12, and
raise it on
concrete
blocks, bricks,
or flat stones.
If you use
slats (2 x 2’s,
or 2 x 4’s)
instead of a
single plank,
water will drain
through the
bench. If you
display bonsai
on shelves
placed against
a wall or

99

100

fence, remember that the
heat reflection from lightcolored walls can
seriously damage bonsai
plants in the summer.
Make sure these displays
are sheltered from direct
sun during the warmest
part of the day, usually
late morning through
afternoon.

Tables

Outdoor tables will
certainly hold a collection
of bonsais trees, but they
may not display them to
their best advantage as
all the pots rest on the
same level. If you do keep
your collection on a table,
choose one just wide
enough for three plants, then place the larger specimens in the
center, with smaller plants on the outside rows. Stagger
placement so that no plant is directly behind another one. For
better display, construct a unit along the lines of a patio table
that has built-in benches. Make the center section (table) just
wide enough to hold a single or double row of plants; the two
lower sections (benches) can be just a bit wider to show off a
number of smaller specimens on each side.

Outdoor Bonsai Maintenance Tips

• Don’t crowd bonsai plants. You should leave about 8 - 12
inches of space between the outspread branches of adjacent
plants so that each plant can develop independently.
• Make sure the plants receive at least morning sun, more if
climate permits. This is particularly important in spring when
plants are putting out new growth.
• Rotate containers about a quarter turn in the same
direction every other week to expose all sides to the same
conditions. Otherwise, new growth will be strongest on the side
facing the light while roots will tend to grow away from the sun.

101

The exquisite beauty of a bonsai tree well
trained in a simple style, and growing vibrantly
in a pot of suitable size and shape, can be the
focus of many happy hours of contemplation.

102

Specimens placed too close to a wall or fence can become onesided as rear branches dwindle from lack of light.
• Rotating small containers is easy; turning larger specimens
is more difficult. Use a lazy susan-type turntable, and you’ll be
able to turn the largest bonsai with the push of a finger.

Display Stands & Winter Shelter

Display Stands. Keeping your collection of bonsai trees on
a stand makes them easier to work with and to see, and gives
protection from extremes
of weather. The large
design on the left is simple
to build from wood, having
a shade of timber battens
and a slatted bench-top.
There is a shelf for
miniature bonsai at the
back and a tool drawer
under the bench. In severe
weather, the trees can be
placed under the bench
and enclosed with
heavygauge clear plastic
sheeting (shown rolled).
Building A Display
Stand.The number of trees in your bonsai collection will
determine the size of the stand. When calculating the
dimensions, be sure to allow each tree plenty of space, and
remember that small as they are,
they do grow. To allow for easier
working, the stand should be made a
little higher than an indoor table. It
should be made of good quality wood,
treated with a preservative, or it
could have a metal frame with a
wooden top. The trees can be placed
on a gravel bed, as this cuts down on
the need to water; but in this case
they should be lifted every now and
then to make sure the roots are not
growing into the gravel. Above the
stand, around the sides and at the

103

104

back, a weather-shade of thin timber laths or canes should be
made. Each strip should be secured an inch apart. This will help
protect the trees from all extremes: hot sunlight, heavy rain,
high winds, and even a certain amount of frost. For harder
winter conditions the bottom of the stand can be enclosed and
the trees placed inside.

Winter Care

Container plantings of any kind are more subject to damage
from cold than plants growing in the ground. Containers just
don’t hold enough soil to insulate plant roots. Where winter
temperatures are frost free or relatively mild (above 20F or -7C)
you can leave a bonsai outside if its normal display area is
protected from wind. Spreading straw or mulch around the pots
also helps insulate the soil. An unheated greenhouse is ideal as
a winter shelter since the plants receive good light, are
somewhat protected from the cold, and with a door ajar or
vents opened slightly, get plenty of air. You can devise a
polyethylene plastic and wood greenhouse by extending a leanto from under house eaves. Leave all or part of one end open,
unless winters are severe.

Building A Cold Frame

With just a bit more effort you can build a simple cold frame
- essentially a low greenhouse with a translucent hinged top.
Placed against a south-facing wall and recessed into the ground
it will keep plants dormant but not frozen (unless you live in the
colder regions of Canada, for example). Dig a rectangle about
six to eight inches deep beside the wall. Using scrap lumber or
plywood, build a frame
with sides the slope
down toward the front; a
six inch slope is
sufficient. Make sure the
front is high enough
(about 18 inches) to
accommodate your
shortest bonsai. Then set
the frame againt the wall
and spread 3 - 4 inches
of gravel in the bottom.
Traditionally, old window

105

Wind-swept style bonsai

106

sashes formed the tops of cold frames, but you can also use
clear plastic, fiberglass, or polyethylene plastic sheeting. In
snowy areas, first cover the fame with fine mesh chicken wire
or hardware cloth. Place the bonsai on the gravel base and
surround and cover the pots lightly with straw. Close the lid for
protection from extreme cold, opening it slightly for ventilation
when the temperature is above freezing.

Winter Watering

During freezing weather, water your bonsai (if they need it)
in the morning. This allows excess water to drain out before the
temperature drops. Water-soaked soil expands as it freezes,
which can cause containers to crack.

107

Displaying Shohin-bonsai isn't the easiest
thing in the world compared to displaying
traditional bonsai. Shohin-bonsai demands
more trees available at the time of displaying,
and more creativity must be put into the
display some times. The main theme of
displaying Shohin or Mame-bonsai is the
seasonal approach. Good quality trees must
be at hand, and using a traditional Shohin
rack demands at least three good Shohinbonsai to succeed. It is "allowed" to replace
a tree with an accent planting or a figurine
i.e., as long as the aesthetic approach is all
right. Setting up a rack with Shohin-bonsai
may be full of compromises. How many of us
yet have a load full of quality Shohin to
choose from? So compromises has to be
made until a good collection is available,
fulfilling the needs at the time of year the
trees are at their best. If one is not importing
already styled trees it will take a while to
build up such a collection, but until then it is
still possible to play with the set up of a
Shohin or Mame display. In the start smaller
displays are the goal, and later racks with
room for more trees will be appropriate.

108

8

Special Bonsai Plantings

T

he exquisite beauty of a bonsai tree well trained in a
simple style, and growing vibrantly in a pot of suitable
size and shape, can be the focus of many happy hours
of contemplation. For some people, such simplicity is all that is
necessary. Others, however, may prefer the more complex
drama of a tree trained to
cling to a rock, or the
grandeur of a bonsai group
planting. Such scenes are
more complicated to create,
but the basic rule of all
bonsai still applies: the
finished planting should
evoke a natural theme.

Rock Plantings

The idea of planting
trees on or over rocks has
come from nature herself in
the picture of a gnarled pine
clinging to the protection of
an outcropping of rock, or of
a small, twisted tree growing
on a cliff face. In rock
plantings, the tree can
either be planted in or on the rock itself, or it can be trained
over the rock, with the roots buried in the soil of the
container.Rocks used for such plantings should be fairly hard,
since soft rocks tend to rot after prolonged exposure to the
elements. They should not be too smooth, and
should be pitted with plenty of small crevices
and small pockets where the roots can grab
hold. Rocks with a saddle-shaped depression or
a large, deep pocket are ideal for planting
directly onto the rock. Just make sure that the
drainage is correct, as if the water doesn’t run

109

Most bonsai are hardy outdoor
plants that need a period of cold
dormancy in the winter to thrive, but
they should be protected from the
harshest winter conditions.

110

off and instead pools in the pocket, the roots could rot; while if
the water runs off straight away, the tree would get no
moisture. Relatively small trees with small leaves, such as
Cotoneaster are ideal for planting on rock.

Group Plantings

Whether planting a small copse of three trees, or a more
ambitious miniature forest, the composition should first be
planned out on paper. A
shallow but wide container
should be used, and the trees
selected should be of the
same variety, but of various
heights. They should always
be planted in odd numbers, not
only because the Japanese
dislike even numbers
(especially 4), but because it
will be found in practice that a
balanced composition is easier
to create with odd numbers.
The soil mixture required would be that which is normally used
for the type of tree being grown.

To Begin:

• Always start by planting the largest tree first. This focal
point is normally set to the right or left of center.
• The second largest tree is then planted to compliment the
first... and so on with the remaining trees.
• Be sure to check and see how the planting is looking, not
only from the front, but from the back and sides as you are
trying to maintain an even balance.
• Do not tie down the trees until the exact position of each
has been determined.
• After planting, thin out any inward growing branches,
except for those trees planted around the outer edge.

Saikei:

Group and rock plantings can be taken a step further by
adding small underplantings of alpine plants and tiny shrubs.
Rocks can be embedded into the soil and small streams
suggested by the use of white sand. Such a planting is

111

Dwarf plants, however, do not always convey
the same impression as their full size counterparts because their growth habits are quite
different.

112

generally called saikei, and small figurines and bridges are
sometimes added to the landscape.

Bonseki:

Using a shallow tray of almost any composition, you can
create a meditative bonseki composition. This generally consists
of a group of rocks or stones placed in raked sand, which gives
the impressions of small islands in the sea. As there are no
living plants in bonseki, it doesn’t require any care and can be
kept indefinitely. Children love bonseki!

Bonkei:

Bonkei is another type of tray landscape which attempts to
replicate natural or imaginary scenes. Every type of material
available can be used, including artificial or real plants,
figurines, false rocks, and paint. The finished effect, however,
should again mimic nature and retain a natural elegance.

113

American gardeners have taken bonsai concepts and applied
them to houseplants. By combining traditional procedures for
handling houseplants with bonsai concepts of design, growers
have created different bonsai styles.

114

9

Trees Suitable For Bonsai Culture

A

ny substantial plant can be trained into a bonsai if it
can adapt to the shallow pots and restricted growth
that bonsai require.
Most bonsai are hardy outdoor
plants that need a period of
cold dormancy in the winter to
thrive, but they should be
protected from the harshest
winter conditions. Some of the
most popular species have
remained so for centuries
among bonsai enthusiasts.
They offer special features
such as flowers, attractive
bark, small foliage or seasonal
fruits and cones. They include
the following plants:
Azalea (Rhododendron) These are easily trained into
tree form and can be used for
most styles. In late spring,
they produce spectacular flowers. Several flower colors are
available.
Beech (Fagus) - Deciduous beeches tend to be grown in
informal bonsai styles. They require very special and delicate
technique in styling.
Fig (Ficus) - This tropical family includes some species that
have been trained to grow as indoor bonsai. Still, these plants
should be placed outside when the weather allows.
Juniper (Juniperus) - Probably the easiest genus for a
beginner, evergreen juniper is readily available and can be
trained in most styles.
Maple (Acer) - Two main species of maple are used in
bonsai: Japanese maple (Acer palmatum) and trident maple

115

Bonsai are shaped by pruning, wiring and pinching. Pruning and wiring
create the tree’s structure by shaping its woody parts, whereas pinching
back the long ends of soft foliage helps side buds to develop, making a
branch bushier or twiggier

116

(Acer
buergerianum).
These deciduous
plants are easy to
care for, and many
display stunning fall
colors.
Pine (Pinus) Pines make beautiful
bonsai, but are not
ideal for a first tree
because they are
difficult to train.
Pemphis acidula Pemphis make oneof-a-kind bonsai, but
are not ideal since
collection of the
material from the wild is very difficult and expensive.

Bonsai Plant Guide

Trees and shrubs are suitable for traditional bonsai.
Specialty nurseries often have a wide selection of dwarf and
semi-dwarf varieties of many species. Dwarf plants, however,
do not always convey the same impression as their full size
counterparts because their growth habits are quite different.
Some trees and shrubs that work well as bonsai are azalea,
beech, boxwood, ginkgo, maple, oak, pine, wisteria, and
zelkova.
AZALEA: Hiryu, Rhododendron obtusum; Satsuki azalea,
Rhododendron indicum; Kurume, Rhododendron obtusum
BEECH: American, Fagus grandifolia; European, Fagus
sylvatica
BOXWOOD: Buxus species
ELM: Chinese, Ulmus parvifolia (many small-leaved cultivars)
FIRETHORN: Pyracantha species
GINKGO: Ginkgo biloba
HAWTHORN: English, Crataegus laevigata; Washington,
Crataegus phaenopyrum

117

HEATHER: Scotch heather,
Calluna vulgaris
HORNBEAM: American, Carpinus
caroliniana (for large bonsai);
Korean, Carpinus coreana;
Japanese, Carpinus japonica
IVY: English ivy, Hedera helix
and cultivars
MAPLE: Japanese, Acer
palmatum (use palmate rather
than dissectum type, preferably a
seedling, not a grafted tree);
Amur, Acer ginnala;
Hedge, Acer campestre;
Trident, Acer buergeranum
OAK: Willow oak, Quercus phellos
PINE: Austrian, Pinus nigra Bristlecone, Pinus aristata
Japanese red, Pinus densiflora Japanese white, Pinus parviflora
Japanese black, Pinus thunbergiana Mugo, Pinus mugo
Scots(Scotch), Pinus sylvestris Swiss stone, Pinus cembra
White, Pinus strobus (dwarf varieties)
Pemphis acidula: Santigue
WISTERIA: Japanese, Wisteria floribunda
YEW: Taxus species and cultivars
ZELKOVA: Japanese, Zelkova serrata
American gardeners have taken bonsai concepts and applied
them to houseplants. By combining traditional procedures for
handling houseplants with bonsai concepts of design, growers
have created different bonsai styles. The following woody
plants (native to the tropics and subtropics of the world) have
been grown as indoor bonsai. These plants can be obtained
from either local or specialized
nurseries.
ACACIA: Acacia baileyana
ARALIA: Balfour, Polyscias
balfouriana; Ming, Polyscias fruticosa;
Geranium-leaf, Polyscias guilfoylei
CAMELLIA: Common, Camellia
japonica; Sasanqua, Camellia
sasanqua

118

CITRUS: Citrus species
(calamondin, kumquat, lemon, lime,
orange, and tangerine)
CHERRY: Surinam, Eugenia
uniflora
CYPRESS: Monterey, Cupressus
macrocarpa
FIG: Mistletoe, Ficus
diversifolia
HERB: Elfin, Cuphea
hypssopifolia
HIBISCUS: Chinese hibiscus, Hibiscus rosa sinensis ‘Cooperi’
HOLLY: Miniature, Malpighia coccigera
JACARANDA: Jacaranda acutifolia
JADE: Crassula species
JASMINE: Jasminum parkeri; Orange, Murraea paniculata;
Confederate star, Trachelospermum jasminoides
LAUREL: Indian, Ficus retusa
MYRTLE:Classic, Myrtus communis
OAK: Cork, Quercus suber; Silk, Grevillea robusta
ORCHID TREE: Bauhinia variegata
OLIVE: Common, Olea europaea
PEPPER TREE: California, Schinus molle
PLUM: Natal, Carissa
grandiflora
POINCIANA: Royal,
Delonix regia
POMEGRANATE: Dwarf,
Punica granatum ‘Nana’
POPINAC: White,
Leucaena glauca
POWDERPUFF TREE:
Calliandra surinamensis
SERISSA (Snow Rose,
Tree of a Thousand Stars):
Serissa foetida (nicest of
all indoor bonsai)

119

