INTRODUCTION

I found the Dalai Lama alone in an empty
basketball locker room moments before he was
to speak before a crowd of six thousand at
Arizona State University. He was calmly sipping
a cup of tea, in perfect repose. “Your Holiness, if
you’re ready ...”
He briskly rose, and without hesitation he left
the room, emerging into the thick backstage

 throng of local reporters, photographers, security
personnel, and students—the seekers, the
curious, and the skeptical. He walked through the
crowd smiling broadly and greeting people as he
passed by. Finally passing through a curtain, he
walked on stage, bowed, folded his hands, and
smiled. He was greeted with thunderous
applause. At his request, the house lights were
not dimmed so he could clearly see his audience,
and for several moments he simply stood there,
quietly surveying the audience with an
unmistakable expression of warmth and goodwill.
For those who had never seen the Dalai Lama
before, his maroon and saffron monk’s robes
may have created a somewhat exotic impression,
yet his remarkable ability to establish rapport
with his audience was quickly revealed as he sat
down and began his talk.

 “I think that this is the first time I am meeting
most of you. But to me, whether it is an old friend
or new friend, there’s not much difference
anyway, because I always believe we are the
same; we are all human beings. Of course, there
may be differences in cultural background or way
of life, there may be differences in our faith, or
we may be of a different color, but we are human
beings, consisting of the human body and the
human mind. Our physical structure is the same,
and our mind and our emotional nature are also
the same. Wherever I meet people, I always
have the feeling that I am encountering another
human being, just like myself. I find it is much
easier to communicate with others on that level. If
we emphasize specific characteristics, like I am
Tibetan or I am Buddhist, then there are
differences. But those things are secondary. If we

 can leave the differences aside, I think we can
easily communicate, exchange ideas, and share
experiences.”
With this, in 1993 the Dalai Lama began a
week-long series of public talks in Arizona. Plans
for his visit to Arizona had first been set into
motion over a decade earlier. It was at that time
that we first met, while I was visiting Dharamsala,
India, on a small research grant to study
traditional Tibetan medicine. Dharamsala is a
beautiful and tranquil village, perched on a hillside in the foothills of the Himalayas. For almost
forty years, this has been the home of the Tibetan
government-in-exile, ever since the Dalai Lama,
along with one hundred thousand other Tibetans,
fled Tibet after the brutal invasion by Chinese
forces. During my stay in Dharamsala I had
gotten to know several members of the Dalai

 Lama’s family, and it was through them that my
first meeting with him was arranged.
In his 1993 public address, the Dalai Lama
spoke of the importance of relating as one human
being to another, and it was this very same
quality that had been the most striking feature of
our first conversation at his home in 1982. He
seemed to have an uncommon ability to put one
completely at ease, to quickly create a simple
and direct connection with a fellow human being.
Our first meeting had lasted around forty-five
minutes, and like so many other people, I came
away from that meeting in great spirits, with the
impression that I had just met a truly exceptional
man.
As my contact with the Dalai Lama grew over
the next several years, I gradually came to
appreciate his many unique qualities. He has a

 penetrating intelligence, but without artifice; a
kindness, but without excessive sentimentality;
great humor, but without frivolousness; and, as
many have discovered, the ability to inspire rather
than awe.
Over time I became convinced that the Dalai
Lama had learned how to live with a sense of
fulfillment and a degree of serenity that I had
never seen in other people. I was determined to
identify the principles that enabled him to achieve
this. Although he is a Buddhist monk with a
lifetime of Buddhist training and study, I began to
wonder if one could identify a set of his beliefs or
practices that could be utilized by non-Buddhists
as well—practices that could be directly applied
to our lives to simply help us become happier,
stronger, perhaps less afraid.

 Eventually, I had an opportunity to explore his
views in greater depth, meeting with him daily
during his stay in Arizona and following up these
discussions with more extensive conversations at
his home in India. As we conversed, I soon
discovered that we had some hurdles to
overcome as we struggled to reconcile our
different perspectives: his as a Buddhist monk,
and mine as a Western psychiatrist. I began one
of our first sessions, for example, by posing to
him certain common human problems, illustrating
with several lengthy case histories. Having
described a woman who persisted in selfdestructive behaviors despite the tremendous
negative impact on her life, I asked him if he had
an explanation for this behavior and what advice
he could offer. I was taken aback when after a

 long pause and reflection, he simply said, “I don’t
know,” and shrugging his shoulders, laughed
good-naturedly.
Noting my look of surprise and
disappointment at not receiving a more concrete
response, the Dalai Lama said, “Sometimes it’s
very difficult to explain why people do the things
they do ... You’ll often find that there are no
simple explanations. If we were to go into the
details of individual lives, since a human being’s
mind is so complex, it would be quite difficult to
understand what is going on, what exactly is
taking place.”
I thought that he was being evasive. “But as a
psychotherapist, my task is to find out why
people do the things that they do ...”
Once again, he broke into the laugh that many
people find so extraordinary—a laugh saturated

 with humor and goodwill, unaffected,
unembarrassed, beginning with a deep resonance
and effortlessly climbing several octaves to end in
a high pitch of delight.
“I think that it would be extremely difficult to
try and figure out how the minds of five billion
people work,” he said, still laughing. “It would be
an impossible task! From the Buddhist viewpoint,
there are many factors contributing to any given
event or situation ... There can be so many
factors at play, in fact, that sometimes you may
never have a full explanation of what’s going on,
at least not in conventional terms.”
Sensing some discomfort on my part, he
observed, “In trying to determine the source of
one’s problems, it seems that the Western
approach differs in some respects from the
Buddhist approach. Underlying all Western

 modes of analysis is a very strong rationalistic
tendency—an assumption that everything can be
accounted for. And on top of that, there are
constraints created by certain premises that are
taken for granted. For example, recently I met
with some doctors at a university medical school.
They were talking about the brain and stated that
thoughts and feelings were the result of different
chemical reactions and changes in the brain. So, I
raised the question: Is it possible to conceive the
reverse sequence, where the thought gives rise to
the sequence of chemical events in the brain?
However, the part that I found most interesting
was the answer that the scientist gave. He said,
‘We start from the premise that all thoughts are
products or functions of chemical reactions in the
brain.’ So it is simply a kind of rigidity, a decision
not to challenge their own way of thinking.”

 He was silent for a moment, then went on: “I
think that in modern Western society, there
seems to be a powerful cultural conditioning that
is based on science. But in some instances, the
basic premises and parameters set up by
Western science can limit your ability to deal with
certain realities. For instance, you have the
constraints of the idea that everything can be
explained within the framework of a single
lifetime, and you combine this with the notion that
everything can and must be explained and
accounted for. But when you encounter
phenomena that you cannot account for, then
there’s a kind of a tension created; it’s almost a
feeling of agony.”
Even though I sensed there was truth in what
he said, I found it difficult to accept at first.
“Well, in Western psychology when we come

 across human behaviors that on the surface are
difficult to explain, there are certain approaches
that we can use to understand what’s going on.
For example, the idea of the unconscious or
subconscious part of the mind plays a prominent
role. We feel that sometimes behavior can be a
result of psychological processes that we aren’t
consciously aware of—for instance, one might
act in a certain way so as to avoid an underlying
fear. Without being aware of it, certain behaviors
may be motivated by the desire to not allow
those fears to surface in the conscious mind, so
we don’t have to feel the discomfort associated
with them.”
Reflecting for a moment, the Dalai Lama said,
“In Buddhism there is the idea of dispositions and
imprints left by certain types of experiences,
which is somewhat similar to the idea of the

 unconscious in Western psychology. For
instance, a certain type of event may have
occurred in an earlier part of your life which has
left a very strong imprint on your mind which can
remain hidden, and then later affect your
behavior. So, there is this idea of something that
can be unconscious—imprints that one may not
be consciously aware of. Anyway, I think that
Buddhism can accept many of the factors that the
Western theorists can come up with, but on top
of that it would add additional factors. For
example, it would add the conditioning and
imprints from previous lives. In Western
psychology, however, I think that there may be a
tendency to overemphasize the role of the
unconscious in looking for the source of one’s
problems. I think that this stems from some of the
basic assumptions that Western psychology starts

 with: for instance, it does not accept the idea of
imprints being carried over from a past life. And
at the same time there is an assumption that
everything must be accounted for within this
lifetime. So, when you can’t explain what is
causing certain behaviors or problems, the
tendency is to always attribute it to the
unconscious. It’s a bit like you’ve lost something
and you decide that the object is in this room.
And once you have decided this, then you’ve
already fixed your parameters; you’ve precluded
the possibility of its being outside the room or in
another room. So you keep on searching and
searching, but you are not finding it, yet you
continue to assume that it is still hidden
somewhere in the room!”

 When I initially conceived of this book, I
envisioned a conventional self-help format in
which the Dalai Lama would present clear and
simple solutions to all life’s problems. I felt that,
using my background in psychiatry, I could
codify his views in a set of easy instructions on
how to conduct one’s daily life. By the end of our
series of meetings I had given up on that idea. I
found that his approach encompassed a much
broader and more complex paradigm,
incorporating all the nuance, richness, and
complexity that life has to offer.
Gradually, however, I began to hear the single
note he constantly sounded. It is one of hope. His

 hope is based on the belief that while attaining
genuine and lasting happiness is not easy, it
nevertheless can be done. Underlying all the
Dalai Lama’s methods there is a set of basic
beliefs that act as a substrate for all his actions: a
belief in the fundamental gentleness and goodness
of all human beings, a belief in the value of
compassion, a belief in a policy of kindness, and
a sense of commonality among all living
creatures.
As his message unfolded, it became
increasingly clear that his beliefs are not based on
blind faith or religious dogma but rather on sound
reasoning and direct experience. His
understanding of the human mind and behavior is
based on a lifetime of study. His views are rooted
in a tradition that dates back over twenty-five
hundred years yet is tempered by common sense

 and a sophisticated understanding of modern
problems. His appreciation of contemporary
issues has been forged as a result of his unique
position as a world figure, which has allowed him
to travel the world many times, exposing himself
to many different cultures and people from all
walks of life, exchanging ideas with top scientists
and religious and political leaders. What
ultimately emerges is a wise approach to dealing
with human problems that is at once optimistic
and realistic.
In this book I have sought to present the Dalai
Lama’s approach to a primarily Western
audience. I have included extensive excerpts
from his public teachings and our private
conversations. In keeping with my purpose of
trying to emphasize the material that is most
readily applicable to our daily lives, I have at

 times chosen to omit portions of the Dalai
Lama’s discussions that concern some of the
more philosophical aspects of Tibetan Buddhism.
The Dalai Lama has already written a number of
excellent books on various aspects of the
Buddhist path. Selected titles can be found at the
end of this book, and those interested in more indepth exploration of Tibetan Buddhism will find
much of value in these books.

 Part I

THE PURPOSE OF LIFE

 Chapter 1

THE RIGHT TO HAPPINESS

I believe that the very purpose of our life is to
seek happiness. That is clear. Whether one
believes in religion or not, whether one believes in
this religion or that religion, we all are seeking

 something better in life. So, I think, the very
motion of our life is towards happiness ...“
With these words, spoken before a large
audience in Arizona, the Dalai Lama cut to the
heart of his message. But his claim that the
purpose of life was happiness raised a question in
my mind. Later, when we were alone, I asked,
“Are you happy?”
“Yes,” he said. He paused, then added, “Yes
... definitely.” There was a quiet sincerity in his
voice that left no doubt— a sincerity that was
reflected in his expression and in his eyes.
“But is happiness a reasonable goal for most
of us?” I asked. “Is it really possible?”
“Yes. I believe that happiness can be
achieved through training the mind.”
On a basic human level, I couldn’t help but
respond to the idea of happiness as an achievable

 goal. As a psychiatrist, however, I had been
burdened by notions such as Freud’s belief that
“one feels inclined to say that the intention that
man should be ‘happy’ is not included in the plan
of ’Creation.‘ ” This type of training had led
many in my profession to the grim conclusion that
the most one could hope for was “the
transformation of hys teric misery into common
unhappiness.” From that standpoint, the claim
that there was a clearly defined path to happiness
seemed like quite a radical idea. As I looked
back over my years of psychiatric training, I
could rarely recall having heard the word
“happiness” even mentioned as a therapeutic
objective. Of course, there was plenty of talk
about relieving the patient’s symptoms of
depression or anxiety, of resolving internal
conflicts or relationship problems, but never with

 the expressly stated goal of becoming happy.
The concept of achieving true happiness has,
in the West, always seemed ill defined, elusive,
ungraspable. Even the word “happy” is derived
from the Icelandic word happ, meaning luck or
chance. Most of us, it seems, share this view of
the mysterious nature of happiness. In those
moments of joy that life brings, happiness feels
like something that comes out of the blue. To my
Western mind, it didn’t seem the sort of thing that
one could develop, and sustain, simply by
“training the mind.”
When I raised that objection, the Dalai Lama
was quick to explain. “When I say ‘training the
mind,’ in this context I’m not referring to ‘mind’
merely as one’s cognitive ability or intellect.
Rather, I’m using the term in the sense of the
Tibetan word Sem, which has a much broader

 meaning, closer to’psyche’ or ‘spirit’, it includes
intellect and feeling, heart and mind. By bringing
about a certain inner discipline, we can undergo a
transformation of our attitude, our entire outlook
and approach to living.
“When we speak of this inner discipline, it can
of course involve many things, many methods.
But generally speaking, one begins by identifying
those factors which lead to happiness and those
factors which lead to suffering. Having done this,
one then sets about gradually eliminating those
factors which lead to suffering and cultivating
those which lead to happiness. That is the way.”

The Dalai Lama claims to have found some

 measure of personal happiness. And throughout
the week he spent in Arizona, I often witnessed
how this personal happiness can manifest as a
simple willingness to reach out to others, to
create a feeling of affinity and goodwill, even in
the briefest of encounters.
One morning after his public lecture the Dalai
Lama was walking along an outside patio on the
way back to his hotel room, surrounded by his
usual retinue. Noticing one of the hotel
housekeeping staff standing by the elevators, he
paused to ask her, “Where are you from?” For a
moment she appeared taken aback by this
foreign-looking man in the maroon robes and
seemed puzzled by the deference of the
entourage. Then she smiled and answered shyly,
“Mexico.” He paused briefly to chat with her a
few moments and then walked on, leaving her

 with a look of excitement and pleasure on her
face. The next morning at the same time, she
appeared at the same spot with another of the
housekeeping staff, and the two of them greeted
him warmly as he got into the elevator. The
interaction was brief, but the two of them
appeared flushed with happiness as they returned
to work. Every day after that, they were joined
by a few more of the housekeeping staff at the
designated time and place, until by the end of the
week there were dozens of maids in their crisp
gray-and-white uniforms forming a receiving line
that stretched along the length of the path that led
to the elevators.

 Our days are numbered. At this very moment,
many thousands are born into the world, some
destined to live only a few days or weeks, and
then tragically succumb to illness or other
misfortune. Others are destined to push through
to the century mark, perhaps even a bit beyond,
and savor every taste life has to offer: triumph,
despair, joy, hatred, and love. We never know.
But whether we live a day or a century, a central
question always remains: What is the purpose of
our life? What makes our lives meaningful?
The purpose of our existence is to seek
happiness. It seems like common sense, and
Western thinkers from Aristotle to William James
have agreed with this idea. But isn’t a life based
on seeking personal happiness by nature selfcentered, even self-indulgent? Not necessarily. In
fact, survey after survey has shown that it is

 unhappy people who tend to be most selffocused and are often socially withdrawn,
brooding, and even antagonistic. Happy people,
in contrast, are generally found to be more
sociable, flexible, and creative and are able to
tolerate life’s daily frustrations more easily than
unhappy people. And, most important, they are
found to be more loving and forgiving than
unhappy people.
Researchers have devised some interesting
experiments demonstrating that happy people
exhibit a certain quality of openness, a willingness
to reach out and help others. They managed, for
instance, to induce a happy mood in a test
subject by arranging to have the person
unexpectedly find money in a phone booth.
Posing as a stranger, one of the experimenters
then walked by and “accidentally” dropped a

 load of papers. The investigators wanted to see
whether the subject would stop to help the
stranger. In another scenario, the subjects’ spirits
were lifted by listening to a comedy album, and
then they were approached by someone in need
(also in cahoots with the experi menter) wanting
to borrow money. The investigators discovered
that the subjects who were feeling happy were
more likely to help someone or to lend money
than another “control group” of individuals who
were presented with the same opportunity to help
but whose mood had not been boosted ahead of
time.
While these kinds of experiments contradict
the notion that the pursuit and achievement of
personal happiness somehow lead to selfishness
and self-absorption, we can all conduct our own
experiment in the laboratory of our own daily

 lives. Suppose, for instance, we’re stuck in
traffic. After twenty minutes it finally begins
moving again, at around parade speed. We see
someone in another car signaling that she wants
to pull into our lane ahead of us. If we’re in a
good mood, we are more likely to slow down
and wave them on ahead. If we’re feeling
miserable, our response may be simply to speed
up and close the gap. “Well, I’ve been stuck here
waiting all this time; why shouldn’t they?”
We begin, then, with the basic premise that
the purpose of our life is to seek happiness. It is a
vision of happiness as a real objective, one that
we can take positive steps toward achieving.
And as we begin to identify the factors that lead
to a happier life, we will learn how the search for
happiness offers benefits not only for the
individual but for the individual’s family and for

 society at large as well.

 Chapter 2

THE SOURCES OF HAPPINESS

Two years ago, a friend of mine had an
unexpected windfall. Eighteen months before that
time, she had quit her job as a nurse to go to
work for two friends who were starting a small

 health-care company. The company enjoyed
meteoric success, and within the eighteen months
they were bought out by a large conglomerate for
a huge sum. Having gotten in on the ground floor
of the company, my friend emerged from the
buyout dripping with stock options—enough to
be able to retire at the age of thirty-two. I saw
her not long ago and asked how she was
enjoying her retirement. “Well,” she said, “it’s
great being able to travel and do the things that
I’ve always wanted to do. But,” she added, “it’s
strange; after I got over all the excitement of
making all that money, things kinda returned to
normal. I mean things are different—I bought a
new house and stuff—but overall I don’t think
I’m much happier than I was before.”
Just around the time that my friend was
cashing in on her windfall profits, I had another

 friend of the same age who found out he was
HIV positive. We spoke about how he was
dealing with his HIV status. “Of course, I was
devastated at first,” he said. “And it took me
almost a year just to come to terms with the fact
that I had the virus. But over the past year things
have changed. I seem to get more out of each
day than I ever did before, and on a moment-tomoment basis, I feel happier than I ever have. I
just seem to appreciate everyday things more,
and I’m grateful that so far I haven’t developed
any severe AIDS symptoms and I can really
enjoy the things I have. And even though I’d
rather not be HIV positive, I have to admit that in
some ways it has transformed my life ... in
positive ways ...”
“In what ways?” I asked.
“Well, for instance, you know that I’ve

 always tended to be a confirmed materialist. But
over the past year coming to terms with my
mortality has opened up a whole new world. I’ve
started exploring spirituality for the first time in
my life, reading a lot of books on the subject and
talking to people ... discovering so many things
that I’ve never even thought about before. It
makes me excited about just getting up in the
morning, about seeing what the day will bring.”
Both these people illustrate the essential point
that happiness is determined more by one’s
state of mind than by external events. Success
may result in a temporary feeling of elation, or
tragedy may send us into a period of depression,
but sooner or later our overall level of happiness
tends to migrate back to a certain baseline.
Psychologists call this process adaptation, and
we can see how this principle operates in our

 everyday life; a pay raise, a new car, or
recognition from our peers may lift our mood for
a while, but we soon return to our customary
level of happiness. In the same way, an argument
with a friend, a car in the repair shop, or a minor
injury may put us in a foul mood, but within a
matter of days our spirits rebound.
This tendency isn’t limited to trivial, everyday
events but persists even under more extreme
conditions of triumph or disaster. Researchers
surveying Illinois state lottery winners and British
pool winners, for instance, found that the initial
high eventually wore off and the winners returned
to their usual range of moment-to-moment
happiness. And other studies have demonstrated
that even those who are struck by catastrophic
events such as cancer, blindness, or paralysis
typically recover their normal or near-normal

 level of day-to-day happiness after an
appropriate adjustment period.
So, if we tend to return to our characteristic
baseline level of happiness no matter what our
external conditions are, what determines this
baseline? And, more important, can it be
modified, set at a higher level? Some researchers
have recently argued that an individual’s
characteristic level of happiness or well-being is
genetically determined, at least to some degree.
Studies such as one that found that identical twins
(sharing the same genetic constitution) tend to
have very similar levels of well-being—regardless
of whether they were raised together or apart—
have led these investigators to postulate a
biological set point for happiness, wired into the
brain at birth.
But even if genetic makeup plays a role in

 happiness—and the verdict is still out on how
large that role is—there is general agreement
among psychologists that no matter what level of
happiness we are endowed with by nature, there
are steps we can take to work with the “mind
factor,” to enhance our feelings of happiness.
This is because our moment-to-moment
happiness is largely determined by our outlook.
In fact, whether we are feeling happy or unhappy
at any given moment often has very little to do
with our absolute conditions but, rather it is a
function of how we perceive our situation, how
satisfied we are with what we have.

 THE COMPARING MIND

What shapes our perception and level of
satisfaction? Our feelings of contentment are
strongly influenced by our tendency to
compare. When we compare our current
situation to our past and find that we’re better
off, we feel happy. This happens, for instance,
when our income suddenly jumps from $20,000
to $30,000 a year, but it’s not the absolute
amount of income that makes us happy, as we
soon find out when we get used to our new
income and discover that we won’t be happy
again unless we’re making $40,000 a year. We
also look around and compare ourselves to
others. No matter how much we make, we tend

 to be dissatisfied with our income if our neighbor
is making more. Professional athletes complain
bitterly about annual salaries of $1 million, $2
million, or $3 million, citing the higher salary of a
teammate as justification for their unhappiness.
This tendency seems to support H. L.
Mencken’s definition of a wealthy man: one
whose income is $100 a year higher than his
wife’s sister’s husband.
So we can see how our feeling of life
satisfaction often depends on who we compare
ourselves to. Of course, we compare other things
besides income. Constant comparison with those
who are smarter, more beautiful, or more
successful than ourselves also tends to breed
envy, frustration, and unhappiness. But we can
use this same principle in a positive way; we can
increase our feeling of life satisfaction by

 comparing ourselves to those who are less
fortunate than us and by reflecting on all the
things we have.
Researchers have conducted a number of
experiments demonstrating that one’s level of life
satisfaction can be enhanced simply by shifting
one’s perspective and contemplating how things
could be worse. In one study, women at the
University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee were
shown images of the extremely harsh living
conditions in Milwaukee at the turn of the century
or were asked to visualize and write about going
through personal tragedies such as being burned
or disfigured. After completing this exercise, the
women were asked to rate the quality of their
own lives. The exercise resulted in an increased
sense of satisfaction with their lives. In another
experiment at the State University of New York

 at Buffalo, subjects were asked to complete the
sentence “I’m glad I’m not a ...” After five
repetitions of this exercise, the subjects
experienced a distinct elevation in their feelings of
life satisfaction. Another group of subjects was
asked by the experimenters to complete the
sentence “I wish I were a ...” This time, the
experiment left the subjects feeling more
dissatisfied with their lives.
These experiments, which show that we can
increase or decrease our sense of life satisfaction
by changing our perspective, clearly point to the
supremacy of one’s mental outlook in living a
happy life.
The Dalai Lama explains, “Although it is
possible to achieve happiness, happiness is not a
simple thing. There are many levels. In Buddhism,
for instance, there is a reference to the four

 factors of fulfillment, or happiness: wealth,
worldly
satisfaction,
spirituality,
and
enlightenment. Together they embrace the totality
of an individual’s quest for happiness.
“Let us leave aside for a moment ultimate
religious or spiritual aspirations like perfection
and enlightenment and deal with joy and
happiness as we understand them in an everyday
or worldly sense. Within this context, there are
certain key elements that we conventionally
acknowledge as contributing to joy and
happiness. For example, good health is
considered to be one of the necessary factors for
a happy life. Another factor that we regard as a
source of happiness is our material facilities, or
the wealth that we accumulate. An additional
factor is to have friendship, or companions. We
all recognize that in order to enjoy a fulfilled life,

 we need a circle of friends with whom we can
relate emotionally and trust.
“Now, all of these factors are, in fact, sources
of happiness. But in order for an individual to be
able to fully utilize them towards the goal of
enjoying a happy and fulfilled life, your state of
mind is key. It’s crucial.
“If we utilize our favorable circumstances,
such as our good health or wealth, in positive
ways, in helping others, they can be contributory
factors in achieving a happier life. And of course
we enjoy these things—our material facilities,
success, and so on. But without the right mental
attitude, without attention to the mental factor,
these things have very little impact on our longterm feelings of happiness. For example, if you
harbor hateful thoughts or intense anger
somewhere deep down within yourself, then it

 ruins your health; thus it destroys one of the
factors. Also, if you are mentally unhappy or
frustrated, then physical comfort is not of much
help. On the other hand, if you can maintain a
calm, peaceful state of mind, then you can be a
very happy person even if you have poor health.
Or, even if you have wonderful possessions,
when you are in an intense moment of anger or
hatred, you feel like throwing them, breaking
them. At that moment your possessions mean
nothing. Today there are societies that are very
developed materially, yet among them there are
many people who are not very happy. Just
underneath the beautiful surface of affluence there
is a kind of mental unrest, leading to frustration,
unnecessary quarrels, reliance on drugs or
alcohol, and in the worst case, suicide. So there
is no guarantee that wealth alone can give you the

 joy or fulfillment that you are seeking. The same
can be said of your friends too. When you are in
an intense state of anger or hatred, even a very
close friend appears to you as somehow sort of
frosty, or cold, distant, and quite annoying.
“All of this indicates the tremendous influence
that the mental state, the mind factor, has on our
experience of daily life. Naturally, then, we have
to take that factor very seriously.
“So leaving aside the perspective of spiritual
practice, even in worldly terms, in terms of our
enjoying a happy day-to-day existence, the
greater the level of calmness of our mind, the
greater our peace of mind, the greater our ability
to enjoy a happy and joyful life.”
The Dalai Lama paused for a moment as if to
let that idea settle, then added, “I should mention
that when we speak of a calm state of mind or

 peace of mind, we shouldn’t confuse that with a
totally insensitive, apathetic state of mind. Having
a calm or peaceful state of mind doesn’t mean
being totally spaced out or completely empty.
Peace of mind or a calm state of mind is rooted
in affection and compassion. There is a very high
level of sensitivity and feeling there.”
Summarizing, he said, “As long as there is a
lack of the inner discipline that brings calmness of
mind, no matter what external facilities or
conditions you have, they will never give you the
feeling of joy and happiness that you are seeking.
On the other hand, if you possess this inner
quality, a calmness of mind, a degree of stability
within, then even if you lack various external
facilities that you would normally consider
necessary for happiness, it is still possible to live
a happy and joyful life.”

 INNER CONTENTMENT

Crossing the hotel parking lot on my way to meet
with the Dalai Lama one afternoon, I stopped to
admire a brand-new Toyota Land Cruiser, the
type of car I had been wanting for a long time.
Still thinking of that car as I began my session, I
asked, “Sometimes it seems that our whole
culture, Western culture, is based on material
acquisition; we’re surrounded, bombarded, with
ads for the latest things to buy, the latest car and
so on. It’s difficult not to be influenced by that.
There are so many things we want, things we
desire. It never seems to stop. Can you speak a
bit about desire?”
“I think there are two kinds of desire,” the

 Dalai Lama replied. “Certain desires are positive.
A desire for happiness. It’s absolutely right. The
desire for peace. The desire for a more
harmonious world, a friendlier world. Certain
desires are very useful.
“But at some point, desires can become
unreasonable. That usually leads to trouble.
Now, for example, sometimes I visit
supermarkets. I really love to see supermarkets,
because I can see so many beautiful things. So,
when I look at all these different articles, I
develop a feeling of desire, and my initial impulse
might be, ‘Oh, I want this; I want that.’ Then, the
second thought that arises, I ask myself, ‘Oh, do
I really need this?’ The answer is usually no. If
you follow after that first desire, that initial
impulse, then very soon your pockets will empty.
However, the other level of desire, based on

 one’s essential needs of food, clothing, and
shelter, is something more reasonable.
“Sometimes, whether a desire is excessive or
negative depends on the circumstances or society
in which you live. For example, if you live in a
prosperous society where a car is required to
help you manage in your daily life, then of course
there’s nothing wrong in desiring a car. But if you
live in a poor village in India where you can
manage quite well without a car but you still
desire one, even if you have the money to buy it,
it can ultimately bring trouble. It can create an
uncomfortable feeling among your neighbors and
so on. Or, if you’re living in a more prosperous
society and have a car but keep wanting more
expensive cars, that leads to the same kind of
problems.”
“But,” I argued, “I can’t see how wanting or

 buying a more expensive car leads to problems
for an individual, as long as he or she can afford
it. Having a more expensive car than your
neighbors might be a problem for them—they
might be jealous and so on—but having a new
car would give you, yourself, a feeling of
satisfaction and enjoyment.”
The Dalai Lama shook his head and replied
firmly, “No.... Self-satisfaction alone cannot
determine if a desire or action is positive or
negative. A murderer may have a feeling of
satisfaction at the time he is committing the
murder, but that doesn’t justify the act. All the
nonvirtuous actions—lying, stealing, sexual
misconduct, and so on—are committed by
people who may be feeling a sense of satisfaction
at the time. The demarcation between a positive
and a negative desire or action is not whether it

 gives you a immediate feeling of satisfaction but
whether it ultimately results in positive or negative
consequences. For example, in the case of
wanting more expensive possessions, if that is
based on a mental attitude that just wants more
and more, then eventually you’ll reach a limit of
what you can get; you’ll come up against reality.
And when you reach that limit, then you’ll lose all
hope, sink down into depression, and so on.
That’s one danger inherent in that type of desire.
“So I think that this kind of excessive desire
leads to greed—an exaggerated form of desire,
based on overexpectation. And when you reflect
upon the excesses of greed, you’ll find that it
leads an individual to a feeling of frustration,
disappointment, a lot of confusion, and a lot of
problems. When it comes to dealing with greed,
one thing that is quite characteristic is that

 although it arrives by the desire to obtain
something, it is not satisfied by obtaining.
Therefore, it becomes sort of limitless, sort of
bottomless, and that leads to trouble. One
interesting thing about greed is that although the
underlying motive is to seek satisfaction, the irony
is that even after obtaining the object of your
desire, you are still not satisfied. The true
antidote of greed is contentment. If you have a
strong sense of contentment, it doesn’t matter
whether you obtain the object or not; either way,
you are still content.”

 So, how can we achieve inner contentment?
There are two methods. One method is to obtain
everything that we want and desire—all the
money, houses, and cars; the perfect mate; and
the perfect body. The Dalai Lama has already
pointed out the disadvantage of this approach; if
our wants and desires remain unchecked, sooner
or later we will run up against something that we
want but can’t have. The second, and more
reliable, method is not to have what we want but
rather to want and appreciate what we have.
The other night, I was watching a television
interview with Christopher Reeve, the actor who
was thrown from a horse in 1994 and suffered a
spinal cord injury that left him completely
paralyzed from the neck down, requiring a
mechanical ventilator even to breathe. When
questioned by the interviewer about how he dealt

 with the depression resulting from his disability,
Reeve revealed that he had experienced a brief
period of complete despair while in the intensive
care unit of the hospital. He went on to say,
however, that these feelings of despair passed
relatively quickly, and he now sincerely
considered himself to be a “lucky guy.” He cited
the blessings of a loving wife and children but
also spoke gratefully about the rapid advances of
modern medicine (which he estimates will find a
cure for spinal cord injury within the next
decade), stating that if he had been hurt just a
few years earlier, he probably would have died
from his injuries. While describing the process of
adjusting to his paralysis, Reeve said that while
his feelings of despair resolved rather quickly, at
first he was still troubled by intermittent pangs of
jealousy that could be triggered by another’s

 innocent passing remark such as, “I’m just gonna
run upstairs and get something.” In learning to
deal with these feelings, he said, “I realized that
the only way to go through life is to look at your
assets, to see what you can still do; in my case,
fortunately I didn’t have any brain injury, so I still
have a mind I can use.” Focusing on his
resources in this manner, Reeve has elected to
use his mind to increase awareness and educate
the public about spinal cord injury, to help others,
and has plans to continue speaking as well as to
write and direct films.

 INNER WORTH

We’ve seen how working on our mental outlook
is a more effective means of achieving happiness
than seeking it through external sources such as
wealth, position, or even physical health. Another
internal source of happiness, closely linked with
an inner feeling of contentment, is a sense of selfworth. In describing the most reliable basis for
developing that sense of self-worth, the Dalai
Lama explained:
“Now in my case, for instance, suppose I had
no depth of human feeling, no capacity for easily
creating good friends. Without that, when I lost
my own country, when my political authority in
Tibet came to an end, becoming a refugee would

 have been very difficult. While I was in Tibet,
because of the way the political system was set
up, there was a certain degree of respect given to
the office of the Dalai Lama and people related
to me accordingly, regardless of whether they
had true affection towards me or not. But if that
was the only basis of people’s relation towards
me, then when I lost my country, it would have
been extremely difficult. But there is another
source of worth and dignity from which you can
relate to other fellow human beings. You can
relate to them because you are still a human
being, within the human community. You
share that bond. And that human bond is
enough to give rise to a sense of worth and
dignity. That bond can become a source of
consolation in the event that you lose
everything else.”

 The Dalai Lama stopped for a moment to
take a sip of tea, then shaking his head he added,
“Unfortunately, when you read history you’ll find
cases of emperors or kings in the past who lost
their status due to some political upheaval and
were forced to leave the country, but the story
afterwards wasn’t that positive for them. I think
without that feeling of affection and connection
with other fellow human beings, life becomes
very hard.
“Generally speaking, you can have two
different types of individuals. On the one hand,
you can have a wealthy, successful person,
surrounded by relatives and so on. If that
person’s source of dignity and sense of worth is
only material, then so long as his fortune remains,
maybe that person can sustain a sense of
security. But the moment the fortune wanes, the

 person will suffer because there is no other
refuge. On the other hand, you can have another
person enjoying similar economic status and
financial success, but at the same time, that
person is warm and affectionate and has a feeling
of compassion. Because that person has another
source of worth, another source that gives him or
her a sense of dignity, another anchor, there is
less chance of that person’s becoming depressed
if his or her fortune happens to disappear.
Through this type of reasoning you can see the
very practical value of human warmth and
affection in developing an inner sense of worth.”

 HAPPINESS VERSUS PLEASURE

Several months after the Dalai Lama’s talks in
Arizona, I visited him at his home in Dharamsala.
It was a particularly hot and humid July
afternoon, and I arrived at his home drenched in
sweat after only a short hike from the village.
Coming from a dry climate, I found the humidity
to be almost unbearable that day, and I wasn’t in
the best of moods as we sat down to begin our
conversation. He, on the other hand, seemed to
be in great spirits. Shortly into our conversation,
we turned to the topic of pleasure. At one point
in the discussion, he made a crucial observation:
“Now sometimes people confuse happiness
with pleasure. For example, not long ago I was

 speaking to an Indian audience at Rajpur. I
mentioned that the purpose of life was happiness,
so one member of the audience said that
Rajneesh teaches that our happiest moment
comes during sexual activity, so through sex one
can become the happiest,” the Dalai Lama
laughed heartily. “He wanted to know what I
thought of that idea. I answered that from my
point of view, the highest happiness is when one
reaches the stage of Liberation, at which there is
no more suffering. That’s genuine, lasting
happiness. True happiness relates more to the
mind and heart. Happiness that depends mainly
on physical pleasure is unstable; one day it’s
there, the next day it may not be.”

 On the surface, it seemed like a fairly obvious
observation; of course, happiness and pleasure
were two different things. And yet, we human
beings are often quite adept at confusing the two.
Not long after I returned home, during a therapy
session with a patient, I was to have a concrete
demonstration of just how powerful that simple
realization can be.
Heather was a young single professional
working as a coun selor in the Phoenix area.
Although she enjoyed her job working with
troubled youth, for some time she had become
increasingly dissatisfied with living in that area.
She often complained about the growing
population, the traffic, and the oppressive heat in
the summer. She had been offered a job in a
beautiful small town in the mountains. In fact, she

 had visited that town many times and had always
dreamed of moving there. It was perfect. The
only problem was the fact that the job she was
offered involved an adult clientele. For weeks,
she had been struggling with the decision whether
to accept the new job. She just couldn’t make up
her mind. She tried making up a list of pros and
cons, but the list was annoyingly even.
She explained, “I know I wouldn’t enjoy the
work as much as my job here, but that would be
more than compensated for by the pure pleasure
of living in that town! I really love it there. Just
being there makes me feel good. And I’m so sick
of the heat here. I just don’t know what to do.”
Her mention of the term “pleasure” reminded
me of the Dalai Lama’s words, and, probing a
bit, I asked, “Do you think that moving there
would bring you greater happiness or greater

 pleasure?”
She paused for a moment, uncertain what to
make of the question. Finally she answered, “I
don’t know ... You know, I think it would bring
me more pleasure than happiness ... Ultimately, I
don’t think I‘dreally be happy working with that
clientele. I really do get a lot of satisfaction
working with the kids at my job....”
Simply reframing her dilemma in terms of
“Will it bring me happiness?” seemed to provide
a certain clarity. Suddenly it became much easier
to make her decision. She decided to remain in
Phoenix. Of course, she still complained about
the summer heat. But, having made the conscious
decision to remain there on the basis of what she
felt would ultimately make her happier, somehow
made the heat more bearable.

 Everyday we are faced with numerous decisions
and choices. And try as we may, we often don’t
choose the thing that we know is “good for us.”
Part of this is related to the fact that the “right
choice” is often the difficult one—the one that
involves some sacrifice of our pleasure.
In every century, men and women have
struggled with trying to define the properrole that
pleasure should play in their lives—a legion of
philosophers, theologists, and psychologists, all
exploring our relationship with pleasure. In the
third century B.C., Epicurus based his system of
ethics on the bold assertion that “pleasure is the
beginning and end of the blessed life.” But even
Epicurus acknowledged the importance of
common sense and moderation, recognizing that

 unbridled devotion to sensual pleasures could
sometimes lead to pain instead. In the closing
years of the nineteenth century, Sigmund Freud
was busy formulating his own theories about
pleasure. According to Freud, the fundamental
motivating force for the entire psychic apparatus
was the wish to relieve the tension caused by
unfulfilled instinctual drives; in other words, our
underlying motive is to seek pleasure. In the
twentieth century, many researchers have chosen
to side-step more philosophical speculations,
and, instead, a host of neuroanatomists have
taken to poking around the brain’s hypothalamus
and limbic regions with electrodes, searching for
the spot that produces pleasure when electrically
stimulated.
None of us really need dead Greek
philosophers, nineteenth-century psychoanalysts,

 or twentieth-century scientists to help us
understand pleasure. We know it when we feel it.
We know it in the touch or smile of a loved one,
in the luxury of a hot bath on a cold rainy
afternoon, in the beauty of a sunset. But many of
us also know pleasure in the frenetic rhapsody of
a cocaine rush, the ecstasy of a heroin high, the
revelry of an alcohol buzz, the bliss of
unrestrained sexual excess, the exhilaration of a
winning streak in Las Vegas. These are also very
real pleasures—pleasures that many in our
society must come to terms with.
Although there are no easy solutions to
avoiding these destructive pleasures, fortunately
we have a place to begin: the simple reminder
that what we are seeking in life is happiness. As
the Dalai Lama points out, that is an unmistakable
fact. If we approach our choices in life keeping

 that in mind, it is easier to give up the things that
are ultimately harmful to us, even if those things
bring us momentary pleasure. The reason why it
is usually so difficult to “Just say no!” is found in
the word “no”; that approach is associated with a
sense of rejecting something, of giving something
up, of denying ourselves.
But there is a better approach: framing any
decision we face by asking ourselves, “Will it
bring me happiness?” That simple question can
be a powerful tool in helping us skillfully conduct
all areas of our lives, not just in the decision
whether to indulge in drugs or that third piece of
banana cream pie. It puts a new slant on things.
Approaching our daily decisions and choices with
this question in mind shifts the focus from what
we are denying ourselves to what we are seeking
—ultimate happiness. A kind of happiness, as

 defined by the Dalai Lama, that is stable and
persistent. A state of happiness that remains,
despite life’s ups and downs and normal
fluctuations of mood, as part of the very matrix of
our being. With this perspective, it’s easier to
make the “right decision” because we are acting
to give ourselves something, not denying or
withholding something from ourselves—an
attitude of moving toward rather than moving
away, an attitude of embracing life rather than
rejecting it. This underlying sense of moving
toward happiness can have a very profound
effect; it makes us more receptive, more open, to
the joy of living.

 Chapter 3

TRAINING THE MIND FOR
HAPPINESS

 THE PATH TO HAPPINESS

In identifying one’s mental state as the prime
factor in achieving happiness, of course that
doesn’t deny that our basic physical needs for
food, clothing, and shelter must be met. But once
these basic needs are met, the message is clear:
we don’t need more money, we don’t need
greater success or fame, we don’t need the
perfect body or even the perfect mate—right
now, at this very moment, we have a mind,
which is all the basic equipment we need to
achieve complete happiness.
In presenting his approach to working with
the mind, the Dalai Lama began, “When we refer
to ‘mind’ or’consciousness,‘ there are many

 different varieties. Just like external conditions or
objects, some things are very useful, some are
very harmful, and some are neutral. So when
dealing with external matter, usually we first try to
identify which of these different substances or
chemicals are helpful, so we can take care to
cultivate, increase, and use them. And those
substances which are harmful, we get rid of. So
similarly, when we talk about mind, there are
thousands of different thoughts or different’minds.
Among them, some are very helpful; those, we
should take and nourish. Some are negative, very
harmful; those, we should try to reduce.
“So, the first step in seeking happiness is
learning. We first have to learn how negative
emotions and behaviors are harmful to us and
how positive emotions are helpful. And we must
realize how these negative emotions are not only

 very bad and harmful to one personally but
harmful to society and the future of the whole
world as well. That kind of realization enhances
our determination to face and overcome them.
And then, there is the realization of the beneficial
aspects of the positive emotions and behaviors.
Once we realize that, we become determined to
cherish, develop, and increase those positive
emotions no matter how difficult that is. There is
a kind of spontaneous willingness from within. So
through this process of learning, of analyzing
which thoughts and emotions are beneficial and
which are harmful, we gradually develop a firm
determination to change, feeling, ‘Now the secret
to my own happiness, my own good future, is
within my own hands. I must not miss that
opportunity!’
“In Buddhism, the principle of causality is

 accepted as a natural law. In dealing with reality,
you have to take that law into account. So, for
instance, in the case of everyday experiences, if
there are certain types of events that you do not
desire, then the best method of ensuring that that
event does not take place is to make sure that the
causal conditions that normally give rise to that
event no longer arise. Similarly, if you want a
particular event or experience to occur, then the
logical thing to do is to seek and accumulate the
causes and conditions that give rise to it.
“This is also the case with mental states and
experiences. If you desire happiness, you should
seek the causes that give rise to it, and if you
don’t desire suffering, then what you should do is
to ensure that the causes and conditions that
would give rise to it no longer arise. An
appreciation of this causal principle is very

 important.
“Now, we have spoken of the supreme
importance of the mental factor in achieving
happiness. Our next task, therefore, is to examine
the variety of mental states that we experience.
We need to clearly identify different mental states
and make a distinction, classifying them
according to whether they lead to happiness or
not.”
“Can you give some specific examples of
different mental states and describe how you
would classify them?” I asked.
The Dalai Lama explained, “Now for
instance, hatred, jealousy, anger, and so on are
harmful. We consider them negative states of
mind because they destroy our mental happiness;
once you harbor feelings of hatred or ill feeling
towards someone, once you yourself are filled by

 hatred or negative emotions, then other people
appear to you as also hostile. So as a result there
is more fear, greater inhibition and hesitation, and
a sense of insecurity. These things develop, and
also loneliness in the midst of a world perceived
as hostile. All these negative feelings develop
because of hatred. On the other hand, mental
states such as kindness and compassion are
definitely very positive. They are very useful ...”
“I’m just curious,” I interrupted. “You
mention that there are thousands of different
states of mind. What would be your definition of
a psychologically healthy or well-adjusted
person? We might use such a definition as a
guideline in determining which mental states to
cultivate and which ones to eliminate.”
He laughed, then with his characteristic
humility he responded, “As a psychiatrist, you

 might have a better definition of a psychologically
healthy person.”
“But I mean from your standpoint.”
“Well, I would regard a compassionate,
warm, kindhearted person as healthy. If you
maintain a feeling of compassion, loving
kindness, then something automatically opens
your inner door. Through that, you can
communicate much more easily with other
people. And that feeling of warmth creates a
kind of openness. You’ll find that all human
beings are just like you, so you’ll be able to
relate to them more easily. That gives you a
spirit of friendship. Then there’s less need to hide
things, and as a result, feelings of fear, self-doubt,
and insecurity are automatically dispelled. Also, it
creates a feeling of trust from other people.
Otherwise, for example, you might find someone

 who is very competent, and you know that you
can trust that person’s competence. But if you
sense that person is not kind, then you have to
hold something back. You feel that‘Oh, I know
that person can do things, but can I really trust
him?’ so you will always have a certain
apprehension which creates a kind of distance
from him.
“So, anyway, I think that cultivating positive
mental states like kindness and compassion
definitely leads to better psychological health and
happiness.”

 MENTAL DISCIPLINE

As he spoke, I found something very appealing
about the Dalai Lama’s approach to achieving
happiness. It was absolutely practical and
rational: Identify and cultivate positive mental
states; identify and eliminate negative mental
states. Although his suggestion to begin by
systematically analyzing the variety of mental
states that we experience initially struck me as
being a bit dry, I gradually became carried away
by the force of his logic and reasoning. And I
liked the fact that rather than classifying mental
states, emotions, or desires on the basis of some
externally imposed moral judgment such as

 “Greed is a sin” or “Hatred is evil,” he
categorizes emotions as positive or negative
simply on the basis of whether they lead to our
ultimate happiness.
Resuming our conversation the next afternoon, I
asked, “If happiness is simply a matter of
cultivating more positive mental states like
kindness and so on, why are so many people
unhappy?”
“Achieving genuine happiness may require
bringing about a transformation in your outlook,
your way of thinking, and this is not a simple
matter,” he said. “It requires the application of so
many different factors from different directions.
You shouldn’t have the notion, for instance, that
there is just one key, a secret, and if you can get
that right, then everything will be okay. It is
similar to taking proper care of the physical

 body; you need a variety of vitamins and
nutrients, not just one or two. In the same way, in
order to achieve happiness, you need a variety of
approaches and methods to deal with and
overcome the varied and complex negative
mental states. And if you are seeking to
overcome certain negative ways of thinking, it is
not possible to accomplish that simply by
adopting a particular thought or practicing a
technique once or twice. Change takes time.
Even physical change takes time. For instance, if
you’re moving from one climate to another, the
body needs time to adapt to the new
environment. And in the same way, transforming
your mind takes time. There are a lot of negative
mental traits, so you need to address and
counteract each one of these. That isn’t easy. It
requires the repeated application of various

 techniques and taking the time to familiarize
yourself with the practices. It’s a process of
learning.
“But I think that as time goes on, you can
make positive changes. Everyday as soon as you
get up, you can develop a sincere positive
motivation, thinking, ‘I will utilize this day in a
more positive way. I should not waste this very
day.’ And then, at night before bed, check what
you’ve done, asking yourself, ‘Did I utilize this
day as I planned?’ If it went accordingly, then
you should rejoice. If it went wrong, then regret
what you did and critique the day. So, through
methods such as this, you can gradually
strengthen the positive aspects of the mind.
“Now, for example, in my own case, as a
Buddhist monk, I believe in Buddhism and
through my own experience I know that these

 Buddhist practices are very helpful to me.
However, because of habituation, through many
previous lifetimes, certain things may arise, like
anger or attachment. So now what I do is: first
learn about the positive value of the practices,
then build up determination, and then try to
implement them. At the beginning, the
implementation of the positive practices is very
small, so the negative influences are still very
powerful. However, eventually, as you gradually
build up the positive practices, the negative
behaviors are automatically diminished. So,
actually the practice of Dharma1 is a constant
battle within, replacing previous negative
conditioning or habituation with new positive
conditioning.”
Continuing he said, “No matter what activity
or practice we are pursuing, there isn’t anything

 that isn’t made easier through constant familiarity
and training. Through training, we can change; we
can transform ourselves. Within Buddhist
practice there are various methods of trying to
sustain a calm mind when some disturbing event
happens. Through repeated practice of these
methods we can get to the point where some
disturbance may occur but the negative effects on
our mind remain on the surface, like the waves
that may ripple on the surface of an ocean but
don’t have much effect deep down. And,
although my own experience may be very little, I
have found this to be true in my own small
practice. So, if I receive some tragic news, at that
moment I may experience some disturbance
within my mind, but it goes very quickly. Or, I
may become irritated and develop some anger,
but again, it dissipates very quickly. There is no

 effect on the deeper mind. No hatred. This was
achieved through gradual practice; it didn’t
happen overnight.“
Certainly not. The Dalai Lama has been
engaged in training his mind since he was four
years old.

The systematic training of the mind—the
cultivation of happiness, the genuine inner
transformation by deliberately selecting and
focusing on positive mental states and challenging
negative mental states—is possible because of
the very structure and function of the brain. We
are born with brains that are genetically
hardwired with certain instinctual behavior

 patterns; we are predisposed mentally,
emotionally, and physically to respond to our
environment in ways that enable us to survive.
These basic sets of instructions are encoded in
countless innate nerve cell activation patterns,
specific combinations of brain cells that fire in
response to any given event, experience, or
thought. But the wiring in our brains is not static,
not irrevocably fixed. Our brains are also
adaptable. Neuroscientists have documented the
fact that the brain can design new patterns, new
combinations of nerve cells and neurotransmitters
(chemicals that transmit messages between nerve
cells) in response to new input. In fact, our brains
are malleable, ever changing, reconfiguring their
wiring according to new thoughts and
experiences. And as a result of learning, the
function of individual neurons themselves change,

 allowing electrical signals to travel along them
more readily. Scientists call the brain’s inherent
capacity to change “plasticity.”
This ability to change the brain’s wiring, to
grow new neural connections, has been
demonstrated in experiments such as one
conducted by Doctors Avi Karni and Leslie
Underleider at the National Institutes of Mental
Health. In that experiment, the researchers had
subjects perform a simple motor task, a fingertapping exercise, and identified the parts of the
brain involved in the task by taking a MRI brain
scan. The subjects then practiced the finger
exercise daily for four weeks, gradually becoming
more efficient and quicker at it. At the end of the
four-week period, the brain scan was repeated
and showed that the area of the brain involved in
the task had expanded; this indicated that the

 regular practice and repetition of the task had
recruited new nerve cells and changed the neural
connections that had originally been involved in
the task.
This remarkable feature of the brain appears
to be the physiological basis for the possibility of
transforming our minds. By mobilizing our
thoughts and practicing new ways of thinking, we
can reshape our nerve cells and change the way
our brains work. It is also the basis for the idea
that inner transformation begins with learning
(new input) and involves the discipline of
gradually replacing our “negative conditioning”
(corresponding with our present characteristic
nerve cell activation patterns) with “positive
conditioning” (forming new neural circuits). Thus,
the idea of training the mind for happiness
becomes a very real possibility.

 ETHICAL DISCIPLINE

In a later discussion related to training the mind
for happiness, the Dalai Lama pointed out, “I
think that ethical behavior is another feature of
the kind of inner discipline that leads to a happier
existence. One could call this ethical discipline.
Great spiritual teachers like the Buddha advise us
to perform wholesome actions and avoid
indulging in unwholesome actions. Whether our
action is wholesome or unwholesome depends
on whether that action or deed arises from a
disciplined or undisciplined state of mind. It is felt
that a disciplined mind leads to happiness and an
undisciplined mind leads to suffering, and in fact it
is said that bringing about discipline within

 one’s mind is the essence of the Buddha’s
teaching.
“When I speak of discipline, I’m referring to
self-discipline, not discipline that’s externally
imposed on you by someone else. Also, I’m
referring to discipline that’s applied in order to
overcome your negative qualities. A criminal gang
may need discipline to perform a successful
robbery, but that discipline is useless.”
The Dalai Lama stopped speaking for a
moment and seemed to be reflecting, gathering
his thoughts. Or, perhaps he was simply
searching for a word in English. I don’t know.
But thinking about our conversation as he paused
that afternoon, something about all this talk
concerning the importance of learning and
discipline began to strike me as being rather
tedious when contrasted with the lofty goals of

 true happiness, spiritual growth, and complete
internal transformation. It seemed that the quest
for happiness should somehow be a more
spontaneous process.
Raising this issue, I interjected, “You describe
the negative emotions and behaviors as being
‘unwholesome’ and the positive behaviors as
’wholesome.‘ Further, you’ve said that an
untrained or undisciplined mind generally results
in negative or unwholesome behaviors, so we
have to learn and train ourselves to increase our
positive behaviors. So far, so good.
“But the thing that bothers me is that your
very definition of negative or unwholesome
behaviors is those behaviors which lead to
suffering. And you define a wholesome behavior
as one that leads to happiness. You also start
with the basic premise that all beings naturally

 want to avoid suffering and gain happiness—that
desire is innate; it doesn’t have to be learned.
The question then is: If it’s natural for us to want
to avoid suffering, why aren’t we spontaneously
and naturally more and more repulsed by the
negative or unwholesome behaviors as we grow
older? And if it is natural to want to gain
happiness, why aren’t we spontaneously and
naturally more and more drawn to wholesome
behaviors and thus become happier as our life
progresses? I mean, if these wholesome
behaviors naturally lead to happiness and we
want happiness, shouldn’t that occur as a natural
process? Why should we need so much
education, training, and discipline for that process
to occur?”
Shaking his head, the Dalai Lama replied,
“Even in conventional terms, in our everyday life,

 we consider education as a very important factor
for ensuring a successful and happy life. And
knowledge does not come by naturally. We have
to train; we have to go through a kind of
systematic training program and so forth. And we
consider this conventional education and training
to be quite hard; otherwise why would students
look forward so much to vacations? Still, we
know that this type of education is quite vital for
ensuring a happy and successful life.
“In the same way, doing wholesome deeds
may not come naturally, but we have to
consciously train towards it. This is so,
particularly in modern society, because there is a
tendency to accept that the question of
wholesome deeds and unwholesome deeds—
what to do and what is not to be done—is
something that is considered to be within the

 purview of religion. Traditionally, it has been
considered the responsibility of religion to
prescribe what behaviors are wholesome and
what are not. However, in today’s society,
religion has lost its prestige and influence to some
degree. And at the same time, no alternative,
such as a secular ethics, has come up to replace
it. So there seems to be less attention paid to the
need to lead a wholesome way of life. It is
because of this that I think we need to make
some special effort and consciously work
towards gaining that kind of knowledge. For
example, although I personally believe that our
human nature is fundamentally gentle and
compassionate, I feel it is not enough that this is
our underlying nature; we must also develop an
appreciation and awareness of that fact. And
changing how we perceive ourselves, through

 learning and understanding, can have a very
real impact on bow we interact with others
and how we conduct our daily lives.”
Playing devil’s advocate, I countered, “Still,
you use the analogy of conventional academic
education and training. That is one thing. But if
you are talking about certain behaviors that you
call ‘wholesome’ or positive, leading to
happiness, and other behaviors leading to
suffering, why does it take so much learning to
identify which behaviors are which and so much
training to implement the positive behaviors and
eliminate the negative? I mean, if you put your
hand in a fire, you get burned. You pull your
hand back, and you’ve learned that this behavior
leads to suffering. You don’t need extensive
learning or training to learn not to touch the fire
again.

 “So, why aren’t all behaviors or emotions that
lead to suffering like that? For instance, you claim
that anger and hatred are clearly negative
emotions and ultimately lead to suffering. But why
does one have to be educated about the harmful
effects of anger and hatred in order to eliminate
them? Since anger immediately causes an
uncomfortable emotional state in oneself, and it is
certainly easy to feel that discomfort directly, why
doesn’t one just naturally and spontaneously
avoid it in the future?”
As the Dalai Lama listened intently to my
arguments, his intelligent eyes widened slightly, as
if he were mildly surprised, or even amused, at
the naïveté of my questions. Then, with a hardy
laugh, full of goodwill, he said:
“When you talk of knowledge leading to
freedom or resolution of a problem, you have to

 understand that there are many different levels.
For example, let’s say that human beings in the
Stone Age didn’t know how to cook meat but
they still had the biological need to eat, so they
just ate like a wild animal. As humans
progressed, they learned how to cook and then
how to put in different spices to make the food
more tasty and then they came up with more
diverse dishes. And even up to our present age, if
we are suffering from a particular illness and
through our knowledge we learn that a certain
type of food is not good for us, even though we
might have the desire to eat it, we restrain
ourselves from eating it. So it is clear that the
more sophisticated the level of our knowledge is,
the more effective we will be in dealing with the
natural world.
“You also need the ability to judge the long-

 term and short-term consequences of your
behaviors and weigh the two. For example, in
overcoming anger, although animals may
experience anger, they cannot understand that
anger is destructive. In the case of human beings,
however, there is a different level, where you
have a kind of self-awareness that allows you to
reflect and observe that when anger arises, it
hurts you. Therefore, you can make a judgment
that anger is destructive. You need to be able to
make that inference. So it’s not as simple as
putting your hand in a fire, and then being burned
and just learning in the future never to do it again.
The more sophisticated your level of education
and knowledge about what leads to happiness
and what causes suffering, the more effective you
will be in achieving happiness. So, it is because of
this that I think education and knowledge are

 crucial.”
Sensing, I suppose, my continued resistance
to the idea of simple education as a means of
internal transformation, he observed, “One
problem with our current society is that we have
an attitude towards education as if it is there to
simply make you more clever, make you more
ingenious. Sometimes it even seems as if those
who are not highly educated, those who are less
sophisticated in terms of their educational
training, are more innocent and more honest.
Even though our society does not emphasize this,
the most important use of knowledge and
education is to help us understand the importance
of engaging in more wholesome actions and
bringing about discipline within our minds. The
proper utilization of our intelligence and
knowledge is to effect changes from within to

 develop a good heart.”

 Chapter 4

RECLAIMING OUR INNATE
STATE OF HAPPINESS

 OUR FUNDAMENTAL NATURE

Now, we are made to seek happiness. And it is
clear that feel-Nings of love, affection, closeness,
and compassion bring happiness. I believe that
every one of us has the basis to be happy, to
access the warm and compassionate states of
mind that bring happiness,“ the Dalai Lama
asserted. ”In fact, it is one of my fundamental
beliefs that not only do we inherently possess the
potential for compassion but I believe that the
basic or underlying nature of human beings is
gentleness.“
“What do you base that belief on?”
“The Buddhist doctrine of ‘Buddha Nature’
provides some grounds for the belief that the

 fundamental nature of all sentient beings is
essentially gentle and not aggressive.2 But one
can adopt this view without having to resort to
the Buddhist doctrine of’Buddha Nature.‘ There
are also other grounds on which I base this belief.
I think the subject of human affection or
compassion isn’t just a religious matter; it’s an
indispensable factor in one’s day-to-day life.
“So, first, if we look at the very pattern of our
existence from an early age until our death, we
can see the way in which we are fundamentally
nurtured by other’s affection. It begins at birth.
Our very first act after birth is to suck our
mother’s or someone else’s milk. That is an act
of affection, of compassion. Without that act, we
cannot survive. That’s clear. And that action
cannot be fulfilled unless there is a mutual feeling
of affection. From the child’s side, if there is no

 feeling of affection, no bond, towards the person
who is giving the milk, then the child may not
suck the milk. And without affection on the part
of the mother or someone else, then the milk may
not come freely. So that’s the way of life. That’s
reality.
“Then, our physical structure seems to be
more suited to feelings of love and compassion.
We can see how a calm, affectionate, wholesome
state of mind has beneficial effects on our health
and physical well-being. Conversely, feelings of
frustration, fear, agitation, and anger can be
destructive to our health.
“We can also see that our emotional health is
enhanced by feelings of affection. To understand
this, we need only to reflect on how we feel when
others show us warmth and affection. Or,
observe how our own affectionate feelings or

 attitudes automatically and naturally affect us
from within, how they make us feel. These gentler
emotions and the positive behaviors that go with
them lead to a happier family and community life.
“So, I think that we can infer that our
fundamental human nature is one of gentleness.
And if this is the case, then it makes all the more
sense to try to live a way of life that is more in
accordance with this basic gentle nature of our
being.”
“If our essential nature is kind and
compassionate,” I asked, “I’m just wondering
how you account for all the conflicts and
aggressive behaviors that are all around us.”
The Dalai Lama nodded thoughtfully for a
moment before replying, “Of course we can’t
ignore the fact that conflicts and tensions do exist,
not only within an individual mind but also within

 the family, when we interact with other people,
and at the societal level, the national level, and
the global level. So, looking at this, some people
conclude that human nature is basically
aggressive. They may point to human history,
suggesting that compared to other mammals‘,
human behavior is much more aggressive. Or,
they may claim, ’Yes, compassion is a part of our
mind. But anger is also a part of our mind. They
are equally a part of our nature; both are more or
less at the same level.‘ Nonetheless,” he said
firmly, leaning forward in his chair, straining with
alertness, “it is still my firm conviction that
human nature is essentially compassionate,
gentle. That is the predominant feature of
human nature. Anger, violence, and aggression
may certainly arise, but I think it’s on a
secondary or more superficial level; in a sense,

 they arise when we are frustrated in our efforts to
achieve love and affection. They are not part of
our most basic, underlying nature.
“So, although aggression can occur, I believe
that these conflicts aren’t necessarily because of
human nature but rather a result of the human
intellect—unbalanced human intelligence, misuse
of our intelligence, our imaginative faculty. Now
in looking at human evolution, I think that
compared to some other animals‘, our physical
body may have been very weak. But because of
the development of human intelligence, we were
able to use many instruments and discover many
methods to conquer adverse environmental
conditions. As human society and environmental
conditions gradually became more complex, this
required a greater and greater role of our
intelligence and cognitive ability to meet the ever-

 increasing demands of this complex environment.
So, I believe that our underlying or fundamental
nature is gentleness, and intelligence is a later
development. And I think that if that human
ability, that human intelligence, develops in an
unbalanced way, without being properly
counterbalanced with compassion, then it can
become destructive. It can lead to disaster.
“But, I think it’s important to recognize that if
human conflicts are created by misuse of human
intelligence, we can also utilize our intelligence to
find ways and means to overcome these conflicts.
When human intelligence and human goodness or
affection are used together, all human actions
become constructive. When we combine a warm
heart with knowledge and education, we can
learn to respect other’s views and other’s rights.
This becomes the basis of a spirit of

 reconciliation that can be used to overcome
aggression and resolve our conflicts.”
The Dalai Lama paused and glanced at his
watch. “So,” he concluded, “no matter how
much violence or how many bad things we have
to go through, I believe that the ultimate solution
to our conflicts, both internal and external, lies in
returning to our basic or underlying human nature,
which is gentle and compassionate.”
Looking again at his watch, he began to laugh
in a friendly way. “So ... we’ll stop here ... It’s
been a long day!” He gathered up his shoes
which he had slipped off during our conversation
and retired to his room.

 THE QUESTION OF HUMAN
NATURE

Over the past few decades, the Dalai Lama’s
view of the underlying compassionate nature of
human beings seems to be slowly gaining ground
in the West, although it has been a struggle. The
notion that human behavior is essentially egoistic,
that fundamentally we are all out for ourselves, is
deeply ingrained in Western thought. The idea
that not only are we inherently selfish but also that
aggression and hostility are part of basic human
nature has dominated our culture for centuries.
Of course, historically there were plenty of
people with the opposite view. For instance, in

 the mid-1700s David Hume wrote a lot about the
“natural benevolence” of human beings. And a
century later, even Charles Darwin himself
attributed an “instinct of sympathy” to our
species. But for some reason the more
pessimistic view of humanity has taken root in our
culture, at least since the seventeenth century,
under the influence of philosophers like Thomas
Hobbes, who had a pretty dark view of the
human species. He saw the human race as being
violent, competitive, in continual conflict, and
concerned only with self-interest. Hobbes, who
was famous for discounting any notion of basic
human kindness, was once caught giving money
to a beggar on the street. When questioned about
this generous impulse, he claimed, “I’m not doing
this to help him. I’m just doing this to relieve my
own distress at seeing the man’s poverty.”

 Similarly, in the earlier part of this century, the
Spanish-born philosopher George Santayana
wrote that generous, caring impulses, while they
may exist, are generally weak, fleeting, and
unstable in human nature but, “dig a little beneath
the surface and you’ll find a ferocious, persistent,
profoundly selfish man.” Unfortunately, Western
science and psychology grabbed hold of ideas
like that, then sanctioned, and even encouraged,
this egoistic view. Beginning in the earliest days of
modern scientific psychology, there was a general
underlying assumption that all human motivation is
ultimately egoistic, based purely on self-interest.
After implicitly accepting the premise of our
essential selfishness, a number of very prominent
scientists over the past hundred years have
added to this a belief in the essential aggressive
nature of humans. Freud claimed that, “the

 inclination to aggression is an original, selfsubsisting, instinctual disposition.” In the latter
half of this century, two writers in particular,
Robert Ardrey and Konrad Lorenz, looked at
patterns of animal behavior in certain predator
species and concluded that humans were
basically predators as well, with an innate or
instinctive drive to fight over territory.
In recent years, however, the tide appears to
be turning on this profoundly pessimistic view of
humanity, coming closer to the Dalai Lama’s
view of our underlying nature as gentle and
compassionate. Over the past two or three
decades, there have been literally hundreds of
scientific studies indicating that aggression is not
essentially innate and that violent behavior is
influenced by a variety of biological, social,
situational, and environmental factors. Perhaps

 the most comprehensive statement on the latest
research was summarized in the 1986 Seville
Statement on Violence that was drawn up and
signed by twenty top scientists from around the
world. In that statement, they of course
acknowledged that violent behavior does occur,
but they categorically stated that it is
scientifically incorrect to say that we have an
inherited tendency to make war or act
violently. That behavior is not genetically
programmed into human nature. They said
that even though we have the neural apparatus to
act violently, that behavior isn’t automatically
activated. There’s nothing in our neurophysiology
that compels us to act violently. In examining the
subject of basic human nature, most researchers
in the field currently feel that fundamentally we
have the potential to develop into gentle, caring

 people or violent, aggressive people; the impulse
that gets emphasized is largely a matter of
training.
Contemporary researchers have refuted not
only the idea of humanity’s innate aggression, but
the idea that humans are innately selfish and
egoistic has also come under attack. Investigators
such as C. Daniel Batson or Nancy Eisenberg at
Arizona State University have conducted
numerous studies over the past few years that
demonstrate that humans have a tendency toward
altruistic behavior. Some scientists, such as soci
ologist Dr. Linda Wilson, seek to discover why
this is so. She has theorized that altruism may be
part of our basic survival instinct—the very
opposite to ideas of earlier thinkers who
theorized that hostility and aggression were the
hallmark of our survival instinct. Looking at over

 a hundred natural disasters, Dr. Wilson found a
strong pattern of altruism among disaster victims,
which seemed to be part of the recovery
process. She found that working together to help
each other tended to ward off later psychological
problems that might have resulted from the
trauma.
The tendency to closely bond with others,
acting for the welfare of others as well as oneself,
may be deeply rooted in human nature, forged in
the remote past as those who bonded together
and became part of a group had an increased
chance of survival. This need to form close social
ties persists up to the present day. In studies,
such as one conducted by Dr. Larry Scherwitz,
examining the risk factors for coronary heart
disease, it has been found that the people who
were most self-focused (those who referred to

 themselves using the pronouns “I,” “me,” and
“my” most often in an interview) were more likely
to develop coronary heart disease, even when
other health-threatening behaviors were
controlled. Scientists are discovering that those
who lack close social ties seem to suffer from
poor health, higher levels of unhappiness, and a
greater vulnerability to stress.
Reaching out to help others may be as
fundamental to our nature as communication.
One could draw an analogy with the
development of language which, like the capacity
for compassion and altruism, is one of the
magnificent features of the human race. Particular
areas of the brain are specifically devoted to the
potential for language. If we are exposed to the
correct environmental conditions, that is, a
society that speaks, then those discreet areas of

 the brain begin to develop and mature and our
capacity for language grows. In the same way, all
humans may be endowed with the “seed of
compassion.” When exposed to the right
conditions—at home, in society at large, and later
perhaps through our own pointed efforts—that
“seed” will flourish. With this idea in mind,
researchers are now seeking to discover the
optimal environmental conditions that will allow
the seed of caring and compassion to ripen in
children. They have identified several factors:
having parents who are able to regulate their own
emotions, who model caring behavior, who set
appropriate limits on the children’s behavior, who
communicate that a child is responsible for her or
his own behavior, and who use reasoning to help
direct the child’s attention to affective or
emotional states and the consequences of her or

 his behavior on others.

Revising our basic assumptions about the
underlying nature of human beings, from hostile to
helpful, can open up new possibilities. If we begin
by assuming the self-interest model of all human
behavior, then an infant serves as a perfect
example, as “proof,” of that theory. At birth,
infants appear to be programmed with only one
thing on their minds: the gratification of their
own needs—food, physical comfort, and so on.
But if we suspend that basic egoistic assumption,
a whole new picture begins to emerge. We could
just as easily say that an infant is born

 programmed for only one thing: the capacity
and Purpose of bringing pleasure and joy to
others. By just observing a healthy infant, it
would be hard to deny the underlying gentle
nature of human beings. And from this new
vantage point, we could make a good case that
the capacity to bring pleasure to another, the
caregiver, is inborn. For example, in a newborn
infant the sense of smell is developed to perhaps
only 5 percent that of an adult, and the sense of
taste is developed very little. But what does exist
of these senses in the newborn is geared toward
the smell and taste of breast milk. The act of
nursing not only provides nutrients for the baby; it
also serves to relieve tension in the breast. So,
we could say that the infant is born with an innate
capacity to bring pleasure to the mother, by
relieving the tension in the breast.

 An infant is also biologically programmed to
recognize and respond to faces, and there are
few people who fail to find genuine pleasure in
having a young baby gazing innocently into their
eyes and smile. Some ethologists have formulated
this into a theory, suggesting that when an infant
smiles at the caregiver or looks directly into his
eyes, the infant is following a deeply ingrained
“biological blueprint,” instinctively “releasing”
gentle, tender, caring behaviors from the
caregiver, who is also obeying an equally
compelling instinctual mandate. As more
investigators strike out to objectively discover the
nature of human beings, the notion of the infant as
a little bundle of selfishness, an eating and
sleeping machine, is yielding to a vision of a being
that comes into the world with an innate
mechanism to please others, requiring only the

 proper environmental conditions to allow the
underlying and natural “seed of compassion” to
germinate and grow.
Once we conclude that the basic nature of
humanity is compassionate rather than aggressive,
our relationship to the world around us changes
immediately. Seeing others as basically
compassionate instead of hostile and selfish helps
us relax, trust, live at ease. It makes us happier.

 MEDITATION ON THE PURPOSE
OF LIFE

As the Dalai Lama sat in the Arizona desert that
week, exploring human nature and examining the
human mind with the scrutiny of a scientist, one
simple truth seemed to shine through and
illuminate every discussion: the purpose of our
life is happiness. That simple statement can be
used as a powerful tool in helping us navigate
through life’s daily problems. From that
perspective, our task becomes one of discarding
the things that lead to suffering and accumulating
the things that lead to happiness. The method, the
daily practice, involves gradually increasing our

 awareness and understanding of what truly leads
to happiness and what doesn’t.
When life becomes too complicated and we
feel overwhelmed, it’s often useful just to stand
back and remind ourselves of our overall
purpose, our overall goal. When faced with a
feeling of stagnation and confusion, it may be
helpful to take an hour, an afternoon, or even
several days to simply reflect on what it is that
will truly bring us happiness, and then reset our
priorities on the basis of that. This can put our life
back in proper context, allow a fresh
perspective, and enable us to see which direction
to take.
From time to time we are faced with pivotal
decisions that can affect the entire course of our
lives. We may decide, for instance, to get
married, to have children, or to embark on a

 course of study to become a lawyer, an artist, or
an electrician. The firm resolve to become happy
—to learn about the factors that lead to
happiness and take positive steps to build a
happier life—can be just such a decision. The
turning-toward happiness as a valid goal and
the conscious decision to seek happiness in a
systematic manner can profoundly change the
rest of our lives.
The Dalai Lama’s understanding of the factors
that ultimately lead to happiness is based on a
lifetime of methodically observing his own mind,
exploring the nature of the human condition, and
investigating these things within a framework first
established by The Buddha over twenty-five
centuries ago. And from this background, the
Dalai Lama has come to some definite
conclusions about which activities and thoughts

 are most worthwhile. He summarized his beliefs
in the following words that can be used as a
meditation.

sometimes when I meet old friends, it reminds me
how quickly time passes. And it makes me
wonder if we’ve utilized our time properly or not.
Proper utilization of time is so important. While
we have this body, and especially this amazing
human brain, I think every minute is something
precious. Our day-to-day existence is very much
alive with hope, although there is no guarantee of
our future. There is no guarantee that tomorrow

 at this time we will be here. But still we are
working for that purely on the basis of hope. So,
we need to make the best use of our time. I
believe that the proper utilization of time is this: if
you can, serve other people, other sentient
beings. If not, at least refrain from harming them.
I think that is the whole basis of my philosophy.
“So, let us reflect on what is truly of value in
life, what gives meaning to our lives, and set our
priorities on the basis of that. The purpose of our
life needs to be positive. We weren’t born with
the purpose of causing trouble, harming others.
For our life to be of value, I think we must
develop basic good human qualities—warmth,
kindness, compassion. Then our life becomes
meaningful and more peaceful—happier.”

 Part II

HUMAN WARMTH AND
COMPASSION

 Chapter 5

A NEW MODEL FOR INTIMACY

 LONELINESS AND CONNECTION

Ientered the sitting room of the Dalai Lama’s
hotel suite, and he motioned for me to sit down.
As tea was poured, he slipped off a pair of
butterscotch-colored Rockports and settled
comfortably into an oversized chair.
“So?” he asked in a casual tone but with an
inflection that said he was ready for anything. He
smiled, but remained silent. Waiting.
Moments before, while sitting in the hotel
lobby waiting for our session to begin, I had
absently picked up a copy of a local alternative
newspaper that had been turned to the
“Personals” section. I had briefly scanned the
densely packed ads, page after page of people

 searching, desperately hoping to connect with
another human being. Still thinking about those
ads as I sat down to begin my meeting with the
Dalai Lama, I suddenly decided to set aside my
list of prepared questions and asked, “Do you
ever get lonely?”
“No,” he said simply. I was unprepared for
this response. I assumed that his response would
be along the lines of, “Of course ... every once in
a while everyone feels some loneliness....” Then I
was planning on asking him how he deals with
loneliness. I never expected to confront anyone
who never felt lonely.
“No?” I asked again, incredulous.
“No.”
“What do you attribute that to?”
He thought for a moment. “I think one factor
is that I look at any human being from a more

 positive angle; I try to look for their positive
aspects. This attitude immediately creates a
feeling of affinity, a kind of connectedness.
“And it may partly be because on my part,
there is less apprehension, less fear, that if I act in
a certain way, maybe the person will lose respect
or think that I am strange. So because that kind
of fear and apprehension is normally absent,
there is a kind of openness. I think it’s the main
factor.”
Struggling to comprehend the scope and
difficulty of adopting such an attitude, I asked,
“But how would you suggest that a person
achieve the ability to feel that comfortable with
people, not have that fear or apprehension of
being disliked or judged by other people? Are
there specific methods that an average person
could use to develop this attitude?”

 “My basic belief is that you first need to
realize the usefulness of compassion,” he said
with a tone of conviction. “That’s the key factor.
Once you accept the fact that compassion is not
something childish or sentimental, once you
realize that compassion is something really
worthwhile, realize it’s deeper value, then you
immediately develop an attraction towards it, a
willingness to cultivate it.
“And once you encourage the thought of
compassion in your mind, once that thought
becomes active, then your attitude towards
others changes automatically. If you approach
others with the thought of compassion, that will
automatically reduce fear and allow an openness
with other people. It creates a positive, friendly
atmosphere. With that attitude, you can approach
a relationship in which you, yourself, initially

 create the possibility of receiving affection or a
positive response from the other person. And
with that attitude, even if the other person is
unfriendly or doesn’t respond to you in a positive
way, then at least you’ve approached the person
with a feeling of openness that gives you a certain
flexibility and the freedom to change your
approach as needed. That kind of openness at
least allows the possibility of having a meaningful
conversation with them. But without the attitude
of compassion, if you are feeling closed, irritated,
or indifferent, then you can even be approached
by your best friend and you just feel
uncomfortable.
“I think that in many cases people tend to
expect the other person to respond to them in a
positive way first, rather than taking the initiative
themselves to create that possibility. I feel that’s

 wrong; it leads to problems and can act as a
barrier that just serves to promote a feeling of
isolation from others. So, if you wish to
overcome that feeling of isolation and loneliness, I
think that your underlying attitude makes a
tremendous difference. And approaching others
with the thought of compassion in your mind is
the best way to do this.”

My surprise about the Dalai Lama’s claim that he
was never lonely was in direct proportion to my
belief in the pervasiveness of loneliness in our
society. This belief wasn’t born merely from an
impressionistic sense of my own loneliness or the

 thread of loneliness that seemed to run as an
underlying theme throughout the fabric of my
psychiatric practice. In the past twenty years,
psychologists have begun to study loneliness in a
scientific manner, conducting a fair number of
surveys and studies on the subject. One of the
most striking findings of these studies is that
virtually all people report that they do experience
loneliness, either currently or in the past. In one
large survey, one-fourth of U.S. adults reported
that they had felt extremely lonely at least once
within the previous two weeks. Although we
often think of chronic loneliness as an affliction
particularly widespread among the elderly,
isolated in empty apartments or in the back
wards of nursing homes, research suggests that
teenagers and young adults are just as likely to
report they are lonely as the elderly.

 Because of the widespread occurrence of
loneliness, investigators have begun to examine
the complex variables that may contribute to
loneliness. For instance, they have found that
lonely individuals often have problems with selfdisclosure, have difficulty communicating with
others, are poor listeners, and lack certain social
skills such as picking up conversational cues
(knowing when to nod, to respond appropriately,
or to remain silent). This research suggests that
one strategy for overcoming loneliness would be
to work on improving these social skills. The
Dalai Lama’s strategy, bowever, seemed to
bypass working on social skills or external
behaviors, in favor of an approach that cut
directly to the heart—realizing the value of
compassion and then cultivating it.
Despite my initial surprise, as I listened to him

 speak with such conviction, I came to firmly
believe that he was never lonely. And there was
evidence to support his claim. Often enough, I
had witnessed his first interaction with a stranger,
which was invariably positive. It started to
become clear that these positive interactions
weren’t accidental or simply the result of a
naturally friendly personality. I sensed that he had
spent a great deal of time thinking about the
importance of compassion, carefully cultivating it,
and using it to enrich and soften the ground of his
everyday experience, making that soil fertile and
receptive to positive interactions with others—a
method that can, in fact, be used by anyone who
suffers from loneliness.

 DEPENDENCE ON OTHERS
VERSUS SELF-RELIANCE

“Within all beings there is the seed of perfection.
However, compassion is required in order to
activate that seed which is inherent in our hearts
and minds....” With this, the Dalai Lama
introduced the topic of compassion to a hushed
assembly. Addressing an audience of fifteen
hundred people, counting among them a fair
proportion of dedicated students of Buddhism,
he then began to discuss the Buddhist doctrine of
the Field of Merit.
In the Buddhist sense, Merit is described as
positive imprints on one’s mind, or “mental

 continuum,” that occur as a result of positive
actions. The Dalai Lama explained that a Field of
Merit is a source or foundation from which a
person can accumulate Merit. According to
Buddhist theory, it is a person’s stores of Merit
that determine favorable conditions for one’s
future rebirths. He explained that Buddhist
doctrine specifies two Fields of Merit: the field of
the Buddhas and the field of other sentient
beings. One method of accumulating Merit
involves generating respect, faith, and confidence
in the Buddhas, the Enlightened beings. The other
method involves practicing actions like kindness,
generosity, tolerance, and so on and conscious
restraint from negative actions like killing,
stealing, and lying. That second method of
acquiring Merit requires interaction with other
people, rather than interaction with the Buddhas.

 On that basis, the Dalai Lama pointed out, other
people can be of great help to us in accumulating
Merit.
The Dalai Lama’s description of other people
as a Field of Merit had a beautiful, lyrical quality
to it that seemed to lend itself to a richness of
imagery. His lucid reasoning and the conviction
behind his words combined to give special power
and impact to his talk that afternoon. As I looked
around the room, I could see that many members
of the audience were visibly moved. I, myself,
was less enthralled. As a result of our earlier
conversations, I was in the rudimentary stages of
appreciating the profound importance of
compassion, yet I was still heavily influenced by
years of rational, scientific conditioning that made
me regard any talk of kindness and compassion
as being a bit too sentimental for my taste. As he

 spoke, my mind began to wander. I started
furtively looking around the room, searching for
famous, interesting, or familiar faces. Having
eaten a big meal just before the talk, I started to
get sleepy. I drifted in and out. At one point in
the talk, my mind tuned in to hear him say “... the
other day I spoke about the factors necessary to
enjoy a happy and joyful life. Factors such as
good health, material goods, friends, and so on.
If you closely investigate, you’ll find that all of
these depend on other people. To maintain good
health, you rely on medicines made by others and
health care provided by others. If you examine all
of the material facilities that you use for the
enjoyment of life, you’ll find that there are hardly
any of these material objects that have had no
connection with other people. If you think
carefully, you’ll see that all of these goods come

 into being as a result of the efforts of many
people, either directly or indirectly. Many people
are involved in making those things possible.
Needless to say, when we’re talking about good
friends and companions as being another
necessary factor for a happy life, we are talking
about interaction with other sentient beings, other
human beings.
“So you can see that all of these factors are
inextricably linked with other people’s efforts and
cooperation. Others are indispensable. So,
despite the fact that the process of relating to
others might involve hardships, quarrels, and
cursing, we have to try to maintain an attitude of
friendship and warmth in order to lead a way of
life in which there is enough interaction with other
people to enjoy a happy life.”
As he spoke, I felt an instinctive resistance.

 Although I’ve always valued and enjoyed my
friends and family, I’ve considered myself to be
an independent person. Self-reliant. Prided
myself on this quality in fact. Secretly, I’ve
tended to regard overly dependent people with a
kind of contempt—a sign of weakness.
Yet that afternoon, as I listened to the Dalai
Lama, something happened. As “Our
Dependence on Others” was not my favorite
topic, my mind started to wander again, and I
found myself absently removing a loose thread
from my shirt sleeve. Tuning in for a moment, I
listened as he mentioned the many people who
are involved in making all our material
possessions. As he said this, I began to think
about how many people were involved in making
my shirt. I started by imagining the farmer who
grew the cotton. Next, the salesperson who sold

 the farmer the tractor to plow the field. Then, for
that matter, the hundreds or even thousands of
people involved in manufacturing that tractor,
including the people who mined the ore to make
the metal for each part of the tractor. And all the
designers of the tractor. Then, of course, the
people who processed the cotton, the people
who wove the cloth, and the people who cut,
dyed, and sewed that cloth. The cargo workers
and truck drivers who delivered the shirt to the
store and the salesperson who sold the shirt to
me. It occurred to me that virtually every aspect
of my life came about as the results of others’
efforts. My precious self-reliance was a complete
illusion, a fantasy. As this realization dawned on
me, I was overcome with a profound sense of the
interconnectedness and interdependence of all
beings. I felt a softening. Something. I don’t

 know. It made me want to cry.

 INTIMACY

Our need for other people is paradoxical. At the
same time that our culture is caught up in the
celebration of fierce independence, we also yearn
for intimacy and connection with a special loved
one. We focus all our energy on finding the one
person who we hope will heal our loneliness yet
prop up our illusion that we are still independent.
Though this connection is difficult to achieve with
even one person, I would find out that the Dalai
Lama is capable of and recommends maintaining
closeness with as many people as possible. In
fact, his aim is to connect with everyone.
Meeting with him in his hotel suite in Arizona
late one afternoon, I began, “In your public talk

 yesterday afternoon you spoke of the importance
of others, describing them as a Field of Merit.
But in examining our relationship with others,
there are really so many different ways in which
we can relate to one another, different kinds of
relationships ...”
“That’s very true,” said the Dalai Lama.
“For instance, there’s a certain type of
relationship that’s highly valued in the West,” I
observed. “That is a relationship that’s
characterized by a deep level of intimacy
between two people, having one special person
with whom you can share your deepest feelings,
fears, and so on. People feel that unless they
have a relationship of this kind that there is
something missing in their lives ... In fact,
Western psychotherapy often seeks to help
people learn how to develop that type of intimate

 relationship ...”
“Yes, I believe that kind of intimacy can be
seen as something positive,” the Dalai Lama
agreed. “I think if someone is deprived of that
kind of intimacy then it can lead to problems ...”
“I’m just wondering then ...,” I continued,
“when you were growing up in Tibet, you were
not only considered to be like a king but you
were also considered to be a deity. I assume that
people were in awe of you, perhaps even a bit
nervous or frightened to be in your presence.
Didn’t that create a certain emotional distance
from others, a feeling of isolation? Also, being
separated from your family, being raised as a
monk from an early age, and as a monk never
marrying and so on—didn’t all these things
contribute to a feeling of separation from others?
Do you ever feel that you missed out on

 developing a deeper level of personal intimacy
with others or with one special person, such as a
spouse?”
Without hesitation, he replied, “No. I never
felt a lack of intimacy. Of course my father
passed away many years ago, but I felt quite
close to my mother, my teachers, my tutors, and
others. And with many of these people I could
share my deepest feelings, fears, and concerns.
When I was in Tibet, on state occasions and at
public events there was a certain formality, a
certain protocol was observed, but that wasn’t
always the case. At other times, for example, I
used to spend time in the kitchen and I became
quite close with some of the kitchen staff and we
could joke or gossip or share things and it would
be quite relaxed, without that sense of formality
or distance.

 “So, when I was in Tibet or since I’ve
become a refugee, I’ve never felt a lack of
people with whom I can share things. I think a lot
of this has to do with my nature. It’s easy for me
to share things with others; I’m just not good at
keeping secrets!” He laughed. “Of course
sometimes this can be a negative trait. For
example, there may be some discussion in the
Kashag3 about confidential things, and then I’ll
immediately discuss these things with others. But
on a personal level, being open and sharing things
can be very useful. Because of this nature I can
make friends more easily, and it’s not just a
matter of knowing people and having a superficial
exchange but of really sharing my deepest
problems and suffering. And it’s the same thing
when I hear good news; I immediately share it

 with others. So, I feel a sense of intimacy and
connection with my friends. Of course it’s
sometimes easier for me to establish a connection
with others because they’re often very happy to
share their suffering or joy with the ‘Dalai Lama,’
‘His Holiness the Dalai Lama.’” He laughed
again, making light of his title. “Anyway, I feel this
sense of connection, of sharing, with many
people. For instance, in the past, if I felt
disappointed or unhappy with Tibetan
government policy or I was concerned with other
problems, even the threat of Chinese invasion,
then I would return to my rooms and share this
with the person who sweeps the floor. From one
point of view it may seem quite silly to some that
the Dalai Lama, the head of the Tibetan
government, facing some international or national
problems, would share them with a sweeper.“ He

 laughed once again. ”But personally I feel it is
very helpful, because then the other person
participates and we can face the problem or
suffering together.“

 EXPANDING OUR DEFINITION OF
INTIMACY

Virtually all researchers in the field of human
relationships agree that intimacy is central to our
existence. The influential British psychoanalyst
John Bowlby wrote that “intimate attachments to
other human beings are the hub around which a
person’s life revolves ... From these intimate
attachments a person draws his strength and
enjoyment of life and, through what he
contributes, he gives strength and enjoyment to
others. These are matters about which current
science and traditional wisdom are at one.”
It is clear that intimacy promotes both

 physical and psychological well-being. In looking
at the health benefits of intimate relationships,
medical researchers have found that people who
have close friendships, people whom they can
turn to for affirmation, empathy, and affection,
are more likely to survive health challenges such
as heart attacks and major surgery and are less
likely to develop diseases such as cancer and
respiratory infections. For example, one study of
over a thousand heart patients at Duke University
Medical Center found that those who lacked a
spouse or close confidant were three times more
likely to die within five years of the diagnosis of
heart disease as those who were married or had
a close friend. Another study of thousands of
residents in Alameda County, California, over a
nine-year period showed that those with more
social support and intimate relationships had

 lower death rates overall and lower rates of
cancer. And a study at the University of
Nebraska School of Medicine of several hundred
elderly people found that those with an intimate
relationship had better immune function and
lower cholesterol levels. Over the course of the
past several years there have been at least a halfdozen massive investigations conducted by a
number of different researchers looking at the
relationship between intimacy and health. After
interviewing thousands of people, the various
investigators all seem to have reached the same
conclusion: close relationships do, in fact,
promote health.
Intimacy is equally as important in maintaining
good emotional health. The psychoanalyst and
social philosopher Erich Fromm claimed that
humankind’s most basic fear is the threat of being

 separated from other humans. He believed that
the experience of separateness, first encountered
in infancy, is the source of all anxiety in human
life. John Bowlby agreed, citing a good deal of
experimental evidence and research to support
the idea that separation from one’s caregivers—
usually the mother or father—during the latter
part of the first year of life, inevitably creates fear
and sadness in babies. He felt that separation and
interpersonal loss are at the very roots of the
human experiences of fear, sadness, and sorrow.
So, given the vital importance of intimacy,
how do we set about achieving intimacy in our
daily lives? Following the Dalai Lama’s approach
outlined in the last section, it would seem
reasonable to begin with learning—with
understanding what intimacy is, seeking a
workable definition and model of intimacy. In

 looking to science for the answer, however, it
seems that despite the universal agreement
among researchers about the importance of
intimacy, that seems to be where the agreement
ends. Perhaps the most striking feature of even a
cursory review of the various studies on intimacy
is the wide diversity of definitions and theories
about exactly what intimacy is.
At the most concrete end of the spectrum is
the author Desmond Morris, who writes about
intimacy from the perspective of a zoologist
trained in ethology. In his book, Intimate
Behavior, Morris defines intimacy: “To be
intimate means to be close ... In my terms, the act
of intimacy occurs whenever two individuals
come into bodily contact.” After defining intimacy
in terms of purely physical contact, he then goes
on to explore the countless ways in which

 humans come into physical contact with one
another, from a simple pat on the back to the
most erotic sexual embrace. He sees touch as the
vehicle through which we comfort one another
and are comforted, via hugs or clasps of the hand
and, when those avenues are not available to us,
more indirect means of physical contact such as a
manicure. He even theorizes that the physical
contacts we have with objects in our
environment, from cigarettes to jewelry to
waterbeds, act as substitutes for intimacy.
Most investigators are not so concrete in their
definitions of intimacy, agreeing that intimacy is
more than just physical closeness. Looking at the
root of the word intimacy, from the Latin intima
meaning “inner” or “innermost,” they most often
subscribe to a broader definition, such as the one
offered by Dr. Dan McAdams, author of several

 books on the subject of intimacy: “The desire for
intimacy is the desire to share one’s innermost
self with another.”
But definitions of intimacy don’t stop there.
On the opposite end of the spectrum from
Desmond Morris stand experts such as the
father/son psychiatrist team, Drs. Thomas Patrick
Malone and Patrick Thomas Malone. In their
book, The Art of Intimacy, they define intimacy
as “the experience of connectivity.” Their
understanding of intimacy begins with a thorough
examination of our “connectivity” with other
people, but they do not, however, limit their
concept of intimacy to human relationships. Their
definition is so broad, in fact, that it includes our
relationship with inanimate objects—trees, stars,
and even space.
Concepts of the most ideal form of intimacy

 also vary throughout the world and history. The
romantic notion of that “One Special Person”
with whom we have a passionate intimate
relationship is a product of our time and culture.
But this model of intimacy is not universally
accepted among all cultures. For instance, the
Japanese seem to rely more on friendships to
gain intimacy, whereas Americans seek it more in
romantic relationships with a boyfriend, girlfriend,
or spouse. In noting this, some researchers have
suggested that Asians who tend to be less
focused on personal feelings such as passion and
are more concerned with the practical aspects of
social attachments appear less vulnerable to the
kind of disillusionment that leads to the crumbling
of relationships.
In addition to variations among cultures,
concepts of intimacy have also dramatically

 changed over time. In colonial America, the level
of physical intimacy and proximity was generally
greater than it is today, as family and even
strangers shared close spaces and slept together
in one room and used a common room for
bathing, eating, and sleeping. Yet the customary
level of communication among spouses was quite
formal by today’s standards—not much different
from the way acquaintances or neighbors spoke
to one another. Only a century later, love and
marriage became highly romanticized and intimate
self-disclosure was expected to be an ingredient
in any loving partnership.
Ideas of what is considered to be private and
intimate behavior have also changed over time. In
sixteenth-century Germany, for instance, a new
husband and wife were expected to consummate
their marriage on a bed carried by witnesses who

 would validate the marriage.
How people express their emotions has also
changed. In the Middle Ages it was considered
normal to publicly express a wide range of
feelings with great intensity and directness—joy,
rage, fear, piety, and even pleasure at torturing
and killing enemies. Extremes of hysterical
laughter, passionate weeping, and violent rage
were expressed much more than would be
accepted in our society. But the commonplace
expression of emotions and feelings in that
society ruled out the concept of emotional
intimacy; if one is to display all emotions openly
and indiscriminately, then there are no private
feelings left to express to a special few.
Clearly, the notions we take for granted about
intimacy are not universal. They change over time
and are often shaped by economic, social, and

 cultural conditions. And it is easy to become
confused by the variety of different contemporary
Western definitions of intimacy—with
manifestations ranging from a haircut to our
relationship with Neptune’s moons. So where
does this leave us in our quest to understand
what intimacy is? I think that the implication is
clear:
There is an incredible diversity among human
lives, infinite variations among people with
respect to how they can experience a sense of
closeness. This realization alone offers us a great
opportunity. It means that at this very moment
we have vast resources of intimacy available to
us. Intimacy is all around us.
Today, so many of us are oppressed by a
feeling of something missing in our lives, intensely
suffering from a lack of intimacy. This is

 particularly true when we go through the
inevitable periods in our life when we’re not
involved in a romantic relationship or when the
passion wanes from a relationship. There’s a
widespread notion in our culture that deep
intimacy is best achieved within the context of a
passionate romantic relationship—that Special
Someone who we set apart from all others. This
can be a profoundly limiting viewpoint, cutting us
off from other potential sources of intimacy, and
the cause of much misery and unhappiness when
that Special Someone isn’t there.
But we have within our power the means to
avoid this; we need only courageously expand
our concept of intimacy to include all the other
forms that surround us on a daily basis. By
broadening our definition of intimacy, we open
ourselves to discovering many new and equally

 satisfying ways of connecting with others. This
brings us back to my initial discussion of
loneliness with the Dalai Lama, a discussion
triggered by a chance perusal of the “Personals”
section of a local newspaper. It makes me
wonder. At the very moment that those people
were composing their ads, struggling to find just
the right words that would bring romance into
their lives and end the loneliness, how many of
those people were already surrounded by
friends, family, or acquaintances—relationships
that could easily be cultivated into genuine and
deeply satisfying intimate relationships? Many, I
would guess. If what we seek in life is happiness,
and intimacy is an important ingredient of a
happier life, then it clearly makes sense to
conduct our lives on the basis of a model of
intimacy that includes as many forms of

 connection with others as possible. The Dalai
Lama’s model of intimacy is based on a
willingness to open ourselves to many others, to
family, friends, and even strangers, forming
genuine and deep bonds based on our common
humanity.

 Chapter 6

DEEPENING OUR CONNECTION
TO OTHERS

One afternoon following his public lecture, I
arrived at the Dalai Lama’s hotel suite for my
daily appointment. I was a few minutes early. An

 attendant discreetly glided into the hallway to
relate that His Holiness was occupied in a private
audience and would be several more minutes. I
assumed my familiar post outside his hotel suite
door and used the time to review my notes in
preparation for our session, trying at the same
time to avoid the suspicious gaze of a security
guard—the same look perfected by convenience
store clerks for use on junior high school students
loitering around the magazine racks.
Within a few moments, the door opened and
a well-dressed middle-aged couple were shown
out. They looked familiar. I remembered that I
had been briefly introduced to them several days
earlier. I had been told that the wife was a wellknown heiress and the husband an extremely
wealthy, high-powered Manhattan attorney. At
the time of introduction we had only exchanged a

 few words, but they had both struck me as
unbelievably haughty. As they emerged from the
Dalai Lama’s hotel suite, I noted a startling
change. Gone was the arrogant manner and smug
expressions, and in their place were two faces
suffused with tenderness and emotion. They were
like two children. Streams of tears ran down both
faces. Although the Dalai Lama’s effect on others
was not always so dramatic, I noticed that
invariably others responded to him with some
shift of emotion. I had long marveled at his ability
to bond with others, whatever their walk of life,
and establish a deep and meaningful emotional
exchange.

 ESTABLISHING EMPATHY

While we had spoken of the importance of
human warmth and compassion during our
conversations in Arizona, it wasn’t until some
months later at his home in Dharamsala that I had
an opportunity to explore human relationships
with him in greater detail. By that time I was very
eager to see if we could discover an underlying
set of principles that he uses in his interactions
with others—principles that might be applied to
improve any relationship, whether it be with
strangers, family, friends, or lovers. Anxious to
begin, I jumped right in:
“Now, on the topic of human relationships ...
what would you say is the most effective method

 or technique of connecting with others in a
meaningful way and of reducing conflicts with
others?”
He glared at me for a moment. It wasn’t an
unkindly glare, but it made me feel as if I had just
asked him to give me the precise chemical
composition of moon dust.
After a brief pause, he responded, “Well,
dealing with others is a very complex issue. There
is no way that you can come up with one formula
that could solve all problems. It’s a bit like
cooking. If you are cooking a very delicious
meal, a special meal, then there are various
stages in the cooking. You may have to first boil
the vegetables separately and then you have to
fry them and then you combine them in a special
way, mixing in spices and so on. And finally, the
end result would be this delicious product.

 Similarly here, in order to be skillful in dealing
with others, you need many factors. You can’t
just say, ‘This is the method’ or ’This is the
technique.‘”
It wasn’t exactly the answer I was looking
for. I thought he was being evasive and felt that
surely he must have something more concrete to
offer. I pressed on: “Well, given that there is no
single solution to improving our relationships, are
there perhaps some more general guidelines that
might be useful?”
The Dalai Lama thought for a moment before
replying, “Yes. Earlier we spoke of the
importance of approaching others with the
thought of compassion in one’s mind. That is
crucial. Of course, just telling someone, ‘Oh, it’s
very important to be compassionate; you must
have more love’ isn’t enough. A simple

 prescription like that alone isn’t going to work.
But one effective means of teaching someone
how to be more warm and compassionate is to
begin by using reasoning to educate the individual
about the value and practical benefits of
compassion, and also having them reflect on how
they feel when someone is kind to them and so
on. In a sense this primes them, so there will be
more of an effect as they proceed in their efforts
to be more compassionate.
“Now in looking at the various means of
developing compassion, I think that empathy is
an important factor. The ability to appreciate
another’s suffering. In fact, traditionally, one of
the Buddhist techniques for enhancing
compassion involves imagining a situation where
there is a sentient being suffering—for instance,
like a sheep about to be slaughtered by the

 butcher. And then try to imagine the suffering that
the sheep may be going through and so on ...”
The Dalai Lama stopped for a moment to reflect,
absently running a string of prayer beads through
his fingers. He commented, “It occurs to me that
if we were dealingwith someone who was very
cold and indifferent, then this kind of technique
may not be very effective. It would be as if you
were to ask the butcher to do this visualization:
the butcher is so hardened, so used to the whole
thing, that itwouldn’t have any impact. So, for
example, it would be very difficult to explain and
utilize that technique for some Westerners who
are accustomed to hunting and fishing for fun, as
a form of recreation ...”
“In that case,” I suggested, “it might not be an
effective technique to ask a hunter to imagine the
suffering of his prey, but you might be able to

 awaken feelings of compassion by beginning with
having him visualize his favorite hunting dog
caught in a trap and squealing with pain ...”
“Yes, exactly ...” agreed the Dalai Lama. “I
think depending on the circumstances one might
modify that technique. For instance, the person
may not have a strong feeling of empathy
towards animals but at least may have some
empathy towards a close family member or
friend. In that case the person could visualize a
situation where the beloved person is suffering or
going through a tragic situation and then imagine
how he or she would respond to that, react to
that. So one can attempt to increase compassion
by trying to empathize with another’s feeling or
experience.
“I think that empathy is important not only as
a means of enhancing compassion, but I think

 that generally speaking, when dealing with others
on any level, if you’re having some difficulties, it’s
extremely helpful to be able to try to put yourself
in the other person’s place and see how you
would react to the situation. Even if you have no
common experience with the other person or
have a very different lifestyle, you can try to do
this through imagination. You may need to be
slightly creative. This technique involves the
capacity to temporarily suspend insisting on your
own viewpoint but rather to look from the other
person’s perspective, to imagine what would be
the situation if you were in his shoes, how you
would deal with this. This helps you develop an
awareness and respect for another’s feelings,
which is an important factor in reducing conflicts
and problems with other people.”

 Our interview that afternoon was brief. I had
been fitted into the Dalai Lama’s busy schedule
at the last minute, and like several of our
conversations, it occurred late in the day.
Outside, the sun was beginning to set, filling the
room with a bittersweet dusky light, turning the
pale yellow walls a deep amber, and illuminating
the Buddhist icons in the room with rich golden
hues. The Dalai Lama’s attendant silently entered
the room, signaling the end of our session.
Wrapping up the discussion, I asked, “I know
that we have to close, but do you have any other
words of advice or methods that you use to help
establish empathy with others?”
Echoing the words he had spoken in Arizona
many months before, with a gentle simplicity he

 answered, “Whenever I meet people I always
approach them from the standpoint of the most
basic things we have in common. We each have
a physical structure, a mind, emotions. We are all
born in the same way, and we all die. All of us
want happiness and do notwant to suffer.
Looking at others from this standpoint rather than
emphasizing secondary differences such as the
fact that I am Tibetan, or a different color,
religion, or cultural background, allows me to
have a feeling that I’m meeting someone just the
same as me. I find that relating to others on that
level makes it much easier to exchange and
communicate with one another.” With that, he
rose, smiled, clasped my hand briefly, and retired
for the evening.

 The following morning, we continued our
discussion at the Dalai Lama’s home.
“In Arizona we spoke a great deal about the
importance of compassion in human relationships,
and yesterday we discussed the role of empathy
in improving our ability to relate to one another
...”
“Yes,” the Dalai Lama nodded.
“Besides that, can you suggest any additional
specific methods or techniques to help one deal
more effectively with other people?”
“Well, as I mentioned yesterday, there is no
way that you can come up with one or two
simple techniques that can solve all problems.
Having said that, however, I think there are some
other factors that can help one deal with others
more skillfully. First, it is helpful to understand
and appreciate the background of the people you

 are dealing with. Also, being more open-minded
and honest are useful qualities when it comes to
dealing with others.”
I waited, but he didn’t say anything more.
“Can you suggest any other methods of
improving our relationships?”
The Dalai Lama thought for a moment. “No,”
he laughed.
I felt that these particular bits of advice were
too simplistic, commonplace really. Still, as that
seemed to be all he had to say on the subject for
the moment, we turned to other topics.

That evening, I was invited to dinner at the home
of some Tibetan friends in Dharamsala. My

 friends arranged an evening that proved to be
quite lively. The meal was excellent, featuring a
dazzling array of special dishes and starring
Tibetan Mo Mos, a tasty meat dumpling. As
dinner wore on, the conversation became more
animated. Soon, the guests were swapping offcolor stories about the most embarrassing thing
they ever did while drunk. Several guests had
been invited to the gathering, including a wellknown couple from Germany, the wife an
architect and the husband a writer, author of a
dozen books.
Having an interest in books, I approached the
author and began a conversation. I asked about
his writing. His replies were short and
perfunctory, his manner blunt and standoffish.
Thinking him rather unfriendly, even snobbish, I
took an immediate dislike to him. Well, at least I

 made an attempt to connect with him, I consoled
myself, and, satisfied that he was simply a
disagreeable person, I turned to conversation
with some of the more amiable guests.
The following day, I ran into a friend at a cafe
in the village and over tea I recounted the events
of the evening before.
“... I really enjoyed everyone, except for Rolf,
that writer ... He seemed so arrogant or
something ... so unfriendly.”
“I’ve known him for several years,” my friend
said, “... I know that he comes across that way,
but it’s just that he’s a bit shy, a bit reserved at
first. He really is a wonderful person if you get to
know him ...” I wasn’t convinced. My friend
continued, explaining, “... even though he is a
successful writer, he has had more than his share
of difficulties in his life. Rolf has really suffered a

 lot. His family suffered tremendously at the hand
of the Nazis during World War II. And he’s had
two children, whom he has been very devoted to,
born with some rare genetic disorder that left
them extremely physically and mentally
handicapped. And instead of becoming bitter or
spending his life playing the martyr, he dealt with
his problems by reaching out to others and spent
many years devoting himself to working with the
handicapped as a volunteer. He really is quite
special if you get to know him.”
As it turned out, I met Rolf and his wife once
again at the end of that week, at a small strip field
serving as the local airport. We were scheduled
on the same flight to Delhi, which turned out to
be canceled. The next flight to Delhi wasn’t for
several days, so we decided to share a car to
Delhi, a grueling ten-hour ride. The few bits of

 background information that my friend had
shared with me had changed my feeling toward
Rolf, and on the long ride down to Delhi I felt
more open toward him. As a result, I made an
effort to sustain a conversation with him. Initially,
his manner remained the same. But with just that
little bit of openness and persistence, I soon
discovered that, as my friend had said, his
standoffishness was more likely due to shyness
than snobbery. As we rattled through the
sweltering, dusty northern Indian coun tryside,
moving ever deeper into conversation, he proved
to be a warm, genuine human being and a
stalwart traveling companion.
By the time we reached Delhi, I realized that
the Dalai Lama’s advice to “understand the
background of people” was not as elementary
and superficial as it first appeared. Yes, it was

 simple perhaps, but not simplistic. Sometimes it is
the most basic and straightforward of advice, the
kind that we tend to dismiss as naive, that can be
the most effective means of enhancing
communication.

Several days later I was still in Delhi on a twoday stopover before returning home. The change
from the tranquillity of Dharamsala was jarring,
and I was in a foul mood. Besides bat tling the
stifling heat, the pollution, and the crowds, the
side-walks swarmed with a common species of

 urban predator dedicated to the Street Swindle.
Walking the scorching Delhi streets, a Westerner,
a Foreigner, a Target, approached by a halfdozen hustlers per block, it felt as if I had
“CHUMP” tattooed on my forehead. It was
demoralizing.
That morning, I fell for a common two-man
street scam. One partner splattered a splotch of
red paint on my shoes while I wasn’t looking.
Down the block, his confederate, an innocent
looking shoeshine boy, brought the paint to my
attention and offered to shine my shoes at the
usual going rate. He deftly shined the shoes within
minutes. When finished, he calmly demanded a
huge sum—two months wages for many in Delhi.
When I balked, he claimed that that was the
price he had quoted me. I objected again, and
the boy began to bellow, drawing a crowd,

 crying that I was refusing to pay him for services
already rendered. Later that day I learned that
this was a common scam played on unsuspecting
tourists; after demanding a huge sum, the
shoeshine boy deliberately raises a fuss, drawing
a crowd, with the intention of extorting the money
from the tourist by embarrassment and the desire
to avoid a scene.
That afternoon I lunched with a colleague at
my hotel. The events of the morning were quickly
forgotten as she inquired about my recent series
of interviews with the Dalai Lama. We became
engrossed in a discussion about the Dalai Lama’s
ideas regarding empathy and the importance of
taking the other person’s perspective. After lunch
we jumped into a cab and set off to visit some
mutual friends. As the cab pulled away, my
thoughts returned to the shoeshine scam that

 morning, and as dark images rustled in my mind,
I happened to glance at the meter.
“Stop the taxi!” I yelled. My friend jumped at
the sudden outburst. The taxi driver scowled at
me in the rearview mirror but kept driving.
“Pull over!” I demanded, my voice now
quivering with a trace of hysteria. My friend
appeared shocked. The taxi stopped. I pointed
at the meter, furiously stabbing at the air. “You
didn’t reset the meter! There was over twenty
rupees on the meter when we started!”
“So sorry, sir,” he said with a dull indifference
that further infuriated me, “I forgot to reset.... I
will restart ...”
“You’re not restarting anything!” I exploded.
“I’m fed up with you people trying to pad fares,
drive around in circles, or do whatever you can
to rip people off ... I’m just ... just ... fed up!” I

 sputtered and fumed with a sanctimonious
intensity. My friend looked embarrassed. The
taxi driver merely stared at me with the same
defiant expression found most often among the
sacred cows that strolled out into the middle of a
busy Delhi street and stopped, with the seditious
intent to hold up traffic. He looked at me as if my
outburst was merely tiresome and boring. I threw
a few rupees into the front seat, and without
further comment opened the car door for my
friend and followed her out.
Within a few minutes we hailed another taxi
and were on our way again. But I couldn’t let it
drop. As we drove through the streets of Delhi, I
continued to complain about how “everyone” in
Delhi was out to cheat tourists and that we were
nothing but quarry. My colleague listened silently
as I ranted and raved. Finally she said, “Well,

 twenty rupees is only around a quarter. Why get
so worked up?”
I seethed with pious indignation. “But it’s the
principle that counts!” I proclaimed. “I can’t see
how you can be so calm about this whole thing
anyway when it happens all the time. Doesn’t it
bother you?”
“Well,” she said slowly, “it did for a minute,
but I started thinking about what we were talking
about at lunch, about the Dalai Lama saying how
important it is to see things from another’s
perspective. While youwere getting worked up, I
tried to think about what I might have in common
with the cabdriver. We both want good food to
eat, to sleep well, to feel good, to be loved, and
so on. Then, I tried to imagine myself as the
cabdriver. I sit in a stifling cab all day without air
conditioning, maybe I’m angry and jealous of rich

 foreigners.... and the best way I can come up
with to try to make things ‘fair,’ to be happy, is
to derive ways to cheat people out of their
money. But the thing is, even when it works and I
squeeze a few extra rupees out of an
unsuspecting tourist, I can’t imagine that it’s a
very satisfying way to be happier or a very
satisfying life.... Anyway, the more I imagined
myself as the cabdriver, somehow the less angry
I was at him. His life just seemed sad.... I mean, I
still don’t agree with what he did and we were
right to get out of the cab, but I just couldn’t get
worked up enough to hate him for it....”
I was silent. Startled, in fact, at how little I
had actually absorbed from the Dalai Lama. By
that time I was beginning to develop an
appreciation of the practical value of his advice,
such as “understanding another’s background,”

 and of course I found his examples of how he
implemented these principles in his own life to be
inspiring. But as I thought back over our series of
discussions, beginning in Arizona and now
continuing in India, I realized that right from the
beginning our interviews had taken on a clinical
tone, as if I were asking him about human
anatomy, only in this case, it was the anatomy of
the human mind and spirit. Until that moment,
however, somehow it hadn’t occurred to me to
apply his ideas fully to my own life, at least not
right now—I always had a vague intention of
trying to implement his ideas in my life at some
point in the future, perhaps when I had more
time.

 EXAMINING THE UNDERLYING
BASIS OF A RELATIONSHIP

My conversations with the Dalai Lama in Arizona
had begun with a discussion about the sources of
happiness. And despite the fact that he has
chosen to live his life as a monk, studies have
shown that marriage is a factor that can, in fact,
bring happiness—providing the intimacy and
close bonds that enhance health and overall life
satisfaction. There have been many thousands of
surveys of Americans and Europeans that show
that generally, married people are happier and
more satisfied with life than single or widowed
people—or especially compared to divorced or

 separated people. One survey found that six in
ten Americans who rate their marriage as “very
happy” also rate their life as a whole as “very
happy.” In discussing the topic of human
relationships, I thought it important to bring up
the subject of that common source of happiness.
Minutes before one scheduled interview with
the Dalai Lama, I sat with a friend on an outdoor
patio at the hotel in Tucson enjoying a cool drink.
Mentioning the topics of romance and marriage
which I was intending to bring up in my interview,
my friend and I soon began commiserating about
being single. As we talked, a healthy-looking
young couple, golfers maybe, happily vacationing
on the cusp of the tourist season, sat down at a
table near us. They had the look of a midrange
marriage—no longer honeymooners perhaps, but
still young and no doubt in love. It must be nice, I

 thought.
No sooner had they sat down, than they
began to bicker.
“... I told you we’d be late!” the woman
accused acidly, her voice surprisingly husky, the
rasp of vocal cords pickled by years of cigarette
smoke and alcohol. “Now we barely have
enough time to eat. I can’t even enjoy my food!”
“... if you didn’t take so long to get ready ...”
the man shot back automatically, in quieter tones,
but every syllable laden with annoyance and
hostility.
Rebuttal. “I was ready a half-hour ago.
You’re the one who had to finish reading the
paper ...”
And on it went. It didn’t stop. Like the Greek
dramatist Euripides said, “Marry, and it may go
well. But when a marriage fails, then those who

 marry live at home in hell.”
The argument, rapidly escalating, put a quick
end to our lamentations about the single life. My
friend merely rolled his eyes and, quoting a line
from Seinfeld, said, “Oh yeah! I want to get
married real soon!”

Only moments before, I had every intention of
starting our session by soliciting the Dalai Lama’s
opinion about the joys and virtues of romance
and marriage. Instead, I entered his hotel suite
and almost before sitting down, asked, “Why do
you suppose that conflicts seem to arise so often
in marriages?”
“When dealing with conflicts, of course it can

 be quite complex,” the Dalai Lama explained.
“There can be many factors involved. So, when
we are dealing with trying to understand
relationship problems, the first stage in this
process involves deliberately reflecting on the
underlying nature and basis of that
relationship.
“So, first of all, one has to recognize that there
are different types of relationships and
understand the differences between them. For
example, leaving aside the issue of marriage for a
moment, even within ordinary friendships we can
recognize that there are different types of
friendships. Some friendships are based on
wealth, power, or position. In these cases your
friendship continues as long as your power,
wealth, or position is sustained. Once these
grounds are no longer there, then the friendship

 will also begin to disappear. On the other hand,
there is another kind of friendship. Friendships
that are based not on considerations of wealth,
power, and position but rather on true human
feeling, a feeling of closeness in which there is a
sense of sharing and connectedness. This type of
friendship is what I would call genuine friendship
because it would not be affected by the status of
the individual’s wealth, position, or power,
whether it is increasing or whether it is declining.
The factor that sustains a genuine friendship is a
feeling of affection. If you lack that, then you
won’t be able to sustain a genuine friendship. Of
course, we have mentioned this before and all
this is very obvious, but if you’re running into
relationship problems, it’s often very helpful to
simply stand back and reflect on the basis of that
relationship.

 “In the same way, if someone is running into
problems with his or her spouse, it can be helpful
to look at the underlying basis of the relationship.
For example, you often find relationships very
much based on immediate sexual attraction.
When a couple has just met, seen each other on
just a few occasions, they may be madly in love
and very happy,” he laughed, “but any decision
about marriage made at that instant would be
very shaky. Just as one can become, in some
sense, insane from the power of intense anger or
hatred, it is also possible for an individual to
become in some sense insane by the power of
passion or lust. And sometimes you might even
find situations where an individual could feel,
‘Oh, my boyfriend or girlfriend is not really a
good person, not a kind person, but still I feel
attracted to him or her.’ So a relationship that is

 based on that initial attraction is very unreliable,
very unstable, because it is very much based on
temporary phenomena. That feeling is very short
lived, so after some time, that will go.” He
snapped his fingers. “So it shouldn’t be much of a
surprise if that kind of relationship runs into
trouble, and a marriage based on that will
eventually run into trouble ... But what do you
think?”
“Yes, I’d have to agree with you on that,” I
answered. “It seems that in any relationship, even
the most ardent ones, the initial passion eventually
cools down. Some research has shown that those
who regard the initial passion and romance as
essential to their relationship may end up
disillusioned or divorced. One social
psychologist, Ellen Berscheid, at the University of
Minnesota I think, looked at that issue and

 concluded that the failure to appreciate the
limited half-life of passionate love can doom a
relationship. She and her colleagues felt that the
increase in divorce rates over the past twenty
years is partly linked to the increased importance
people place on intense positive emotional
experiences in their lives—experiences like
romantic love. But one problem is that those
types of experiences may be particularly difficult
to sustain over time ...”
“This seems very true,” he said. “So, when
dealing with relationship problems you can see
the tremendous importance of examining and
understanding the underlying nature of the
relationship.
“Now, while some relationships are based on
immediate sexual attraction, you can have other
types of relationships, on the other hand, in which

 the person in a cool state of mind will realize that
physically speaking, in terms of appearance, my
boyfriend or girlfriend may not be that attractive
but he or she is really a good person, a kind,
gentle person. A relationship that is built on that
forms a kind of a bond that is more long lasting,
because there is a kind of genuine communication
at a very human and personal level between the
two ...”
The Dalai Lama paused for a moment as if
mulling the issue over, then added, “Of course, I
should make it clear that one can have a good,
healthy relationship that includes sexual attraction
as one component. So it seems, then, that there
can be two principal types of relationships based
on sexual attraction. One type is based on pure
sexual desire. In this case the motive or the
impetus behind the bond really is just temporary

 satisfaction, immediate gratification. In that type
of relationship, individuals are relating to each
other not so much as people but rather as
objects. That type of relationship is not very
sound. If the relationship is based only on sexual
desire, without a component of mutual respect,
then the relationship becomes almost like
prostitution, in which neither side has respect for
the other. A relationship built primarily on sexual
desire is like a house built on a foundation of ice;
as soon as the ice melts, the building collapses.
“However, there is a second type of
relationship which is also based on sexual
attraction, but in which the physical attraction is
not the predominant basis of the relationship. In
this second type of relationship there is an
underlying appreciation of the value of the other
person based on your feeling that the other

 person is kind, nice, and gentle, and you accord
respect and dignity to that other individual. Any
relationship that is based on that will be much
more long lasting and reliable. It’s more
appropriate. And in order to establish that type
of relationship, it is crucial to spend enough time
to get to know each other in a genuine sense, to
know each other’s basic characteristics.
“Therefore, when my friends ask me about
their marriage, I usually ask how long they’ve
known each other. If they say a few months, then
I usually say, ‘Oh, this is too short.’ If they say a
few years, then it seems to be better. Now they
not only know each other’s face or appearance
but, I think, the deeper nature of the other person
...”
“That’s kind of like Mark Twain’s quote that
‘no man or woman really knows what perfect

 love is until they have been married a quarter of a
century ...”
The Dalai Lama nodded and continued, “Yes
... So, I think many problems occur simply
because of insufficient time to know each other.
Anyway, I think that if one is seeking to build
a truly satisfying relationship, the best way of
bringing this about is to get to know the
deeper nature of the person and relate to her
or him on that level, instead of merely on the
basis of superficial characteristics . And in this
type of relationship there is a role for genuine
compassion.
“Now, I’ve heard many people claim that
their marriage has a deeper meaning than just a
sexual relationship, that marriage involves two
people trying to bond their lives together, share
life’s ups and downs together, share a certain

 intimacy. If that claim is honest, then I believe
that’s the proper basis on which a relationship
should be built. A sound relationship should
include a sense of responsibility and commitment
towards each other. Of course, the physical
contact, the appropriate or normal sexual
relationship between a couple, can provide a
certain satisfaction that could have a calming
effect on one’s mind. But, after all, biologically
speaking, the main purpose of a sexual
relationship is reproduction. And to successfully
achieve that, you need to have a sense of
commitment towards the offspring, in order for
them to survive and thrive. So, developing a
capacity for responsibility and commitment is
crucial. Without that, the relationship provides
only temporary satisfaction. It’s just for fun.” He
laughed, a laugh that seemed to be infused with

 wonder at the vast scope of human behavior.

 RELATIONSHIPS BASED ON
ROMANCE

It felt odd, speaking about sex and marriage to a
man, now over sixty years old, who had been
celibate all his life. He didn’t seem averse to
talking about these issues, but there was a certain
detachment to his comments.
In thinking about our conversation later that
evening, it occurred to me that there was still one
important component of relationships that we
hadn’t covered, and I was curious to learn of his
take on the subject. I brought it up the following
day.
“Yesterday we were discussing relationships

 and the importance of basing a close relationship
or marriage on more than just sex,” I began.
“But, in Western culture, it is not just the physical
sex act but the whole idea of romance—the idea
of falling in love, of being deeply in love with
one’s partner—that is seen as a highly desirable
thing. In movies, literature, and popular culture
there’s a kind of exaltation of this kind of
romantic love. What’s your view of this?”
Without hesitation, the Dalai Lama said, “I
think that, leaving aside how the endless pursuit
of romantic love may affect our deeper spiritual
growth, even from the perspective of a
conventional way of life, the idealization of this
romantic love can be seen as an extreme. Unlike
those relationships based on caring and genuine
affection, this is another matter. It cannot be seen
as a positive thing,” he said decisively. “It’s

 something that is based on fantasy, unattainable,
and therefore may be a source of frustration. So,
on that basis it cannot be seen as a positive
thing.”
There was a finality to the Dalai Lama’s tone
which conveyed that he had nothing more to say
on the subject. In view of the tremendous
emphasis our society places on romance, I felt
that he was dismissing the lure of romantic love
too lightly. Given the Dalai Lama’s monastic
upbringing, I supposed that he didn’t fully
appreciate the joys of romance, and questioning
him further about issues related to romance
would be as helpful as asking him to come out to
the parking lot to take a look at a problem I was
having with my car’s transmission. Mildly
disappointed, I fumbled with my notes for several
moments and passed on to other topics.

 What is it that makes romance so appealing? In
looking at this question, one finds that Eros—
romantic, sexual, passionate love—the ultimate
ecstasy, is a potent cocktail of cultural, biological,
and psychological ingredients. In Western
culture, the idea of romantic love has flourished
over the past two hundred years under the
influence of Romanticism, a movement which has
done much to shape our perception of the world.
Romanticism grew up as a rejection of the
previous Age of Enlightenment, with its emphasis
on human reason. The new movement exalted
intuition, emotion, feeling, and passion. It
emphasized the importance of the sensory world,

 the subjective experience of the individual, and
tended toward the world of imagination, of
fantasy, the search for a world that is not—an
idealized past or utopian future. This idea has had
profound impact not only in art and literature but
also in politics and all aspects of the development
of modern Western culture.
The most compelling element of our pursuit of
romance is the feeling of falling in love. Powerful
forces are at work driving us to seek this feeling,
much more than simply the glorification of
romantic love which we pick up from our culture.
Many researchers feel that these forces are
programmed into our genes from birth. The
feeling of falling in love, invariably mixed with a
sense of sexual attraction, may be a genetically
determined instinctual component of mating
behavior. From an evolutionary perspective, the

 number-one job of the organism is to survive,
reproduce, and assure continued survival of the
species. It is in the best interest of the species,
therefore, if we are programmed to fall in love; it
certainly increases the odds that we will mate and
reproduce. Thus, we have built-in mechanisms to
help make that happen; in response to certain
stimuli, our brains manufacture and pump out
chemicals that create a euphoric feeling, the
“high” associated with falling in love. And while
our brains are marinading in those chemicals, that
feeling so overwhelms us at times that everything
else seems to be blocked out.
The psychological forces driving us to seek
the feeling of being in love are as compelling as
the biological forces. In Plato’s Symposium,
Socrates tells the story of the myth of
Aristophanes, concerning the origin of sexual

 love. According to this myth, the original
inhabitants of Earth were round creatures with
four hands and four feet and with their back and
sides forming a circle. These self-sufficient
sexless beings were very arrogant and repeatedly
attacked the gods. To punish them, Zeus hurled
thunderbolts at them and split them apart. Each
creature was now two, each half longing to
merge with its other half.
Eros, the drive toward passionate, romantic
love, can be seen as this ancient desire for fusion
with the other half. It seems to be a universal,
unconscious human need. The feeling involves a
sensation of merging with the other, of
boundaries breaking down, of becoming one with
the loved one. Psychologists call this the collapse
of ego boundaries. Some feel that this process is
rooted in our earliest experience, an unconscious

 attempt to re-create the experience we had as
infants, a primal state in which the child is
completely merged with the parent or primary
caregiver.
Evidence suggests that newborn infants do not
distinguish between themselves and the rest of the
universe. They have no sense of personal identity,
or at least their identity includes the mother,
others, and all objects in their environment. They
don’t know where they end and the “other”
begins. They lack what is known as object
permanence: objects have no independent
existence; if they are not interacting with an
object, it doesn’t exist. For example, if an infant
is holding a rattle, the baby recognizes the rattle
as part of herself or himself, and if the rattle is
taken away and hidden from view, it ceases to
exist.

 At birth, the brain is not yet fully “hard wired,”
but as the baby grows and the brain matures, the
baby’s interaction with the world becomes more
sophisticated and the baby gradually gains a
sense of personal identity, of “me” as opposed to
“other.” Along with this, a sense of isolation
develops, and gradually the child develops an
awareness of his or her own limitations. The
formation of identity, of course, continues to
develop throughout childhood and adolescence
as the child comes in contact with the world.
People’s sense of who they are comes about as
the result of developing internal representations,
formed in large part by reflections of their early
interactions with the important people in their
lives, and reflections of their role in society in
general. Gradually, the personal identity and
intrapsychic structure become more complex.

 But some part of us may still seek to regress
to an earlier state of existence, a state of bliss in
which there is no feeling of isolation, no feeling of
separation. Many contemporary psychologists
feel that the early “oneness” experience is
incorporated into our subconscious mind, and as
an adult it permeates our unconscious and private
fantasies. They believe that the merging with the
loved one when one is “in love” echoes the
experience of being merged with the mother in
infancy. It re-creates that magic feeling, a feeling
of omnipotence, as if all things are possible. A
feeling like that is hard to beat.
It is no wonder then that the pursuit of
romantic love is so powerful. So what’s the
problem, and why does the Dalai Lama so easily
assert that the pursuit of romance is a negative
thing?

 I considered the problem of basing a
relationship on romantic love, of taking refuge in
romance as a source of happiness. A former
patient, David, came to mind. David, a thirtyfour-year-old landscape architect, initially
presented to my office with classic symptoms of
a severe clinical depression. He explained that his
depression may have been triggered by some
minor work-related stresses, but “mostly it just
kinda came on.” We discussed the option of an
antidepressant medication, which he was in favor
of, and we instituted a trial of a standard
antidepressant. The medication proved to be
very effective, and within three weeks his acute
symptoms improved and he was back to his
normal routine. In exploring his history, however,
it didn’t take long to realize that in addition to his
acute depression, he also suffered from

 dysthymia, a more insidious form of chronic lowgrade depression that had been present for many
years. After he recovered from his acute
depression, we began to explore his personal
history, laying a foundation that would help us
understand the internal psychological dynamics
that may have contributed to his many-year
history of dysthymia.
After only a few sessions, David entered the
office one day in a jubilant mood. “I feel great!”
he declared. “I haven’t felt this good in years!”
My reaction to this wonderful news was to
immediately assess him for the possibility of a
shift into a manic phase of a mood disorder. That
wasn’t the case, however.
“I’m in love!” he told me. “I met her last week
at a site that I’m bidding on. She’s the most
beautiful girl that I’ve ever seen ... We’ve gone

 out almost every night this week, and, I dunno,
it’s like we’re soul mates—perfect for each
other. I just can’t believe it! I haven’t dated for
the past two or three years, and I was getting to
the point that I thought I’d never meet anyone;
then all of a sudden there she was.”
David spent most of that session cataloging all
the remarkable virtues of his new girlfriend. “I
think we’re perfect for each other in every way.
It’s not just a sexual thing either; we’re interested
in the same things, and it’s frightening how much
we think alike. Of course, I’m being realistic, and
I realize that no one is perfect ... Like the other
night it bothered me a bit because I thought she
was flirting a little with some guys at a club we
were at ... but we both had been drinking a lot
and she was just having fun. We discussed it
afterward and worked it out.”

 David returned the following week to inform
me that he had decided to quit therapy.
“Everything is going so great in my life, I just
can’t see what there is to talk about in therapy,”
he explained. “My depression is gone, I’m
sleeping like a baby, I’m back at work doing
really well, and I’m in a great relationship that just
seems to be getting better and better. I think I’ve
gotten something from our sessions, but right now
I just can’t see spending money for therapy when
there’s nothin’ to work on.”
I told him I was happy he was doing so well
but reminded him about some of the family issues
that we had begun to identify that may have led
to his history of chronic dysthymia. All the while,
common psychiatric terms like “resistance” and
“defenses” began to surface in my mind.
He wasn’t convinced. “Well, those may be

 things that I might want to look at someday,” he
said, “but I really think that it just had a lot to do
with loneliness, a feeling that there was someone
missing, a special person that I could share things
with, and now I’ve found her.”
He was adamant in his desire to end therapy
that day. We made arrangements for his family
physician to follow up on his medication regimen,
spent the session in review and closure, and I
ended by assuring him that my door was open at
any time.
Several months later, David returned to my
office:
“I’ve been miserable,” he said with a dejected
tone. “Last time I saw you, things were going so
great. I really thought that I had found my ideal
mate. I even brought up the subject of marriage.
But it seemed that the closer I wanted to

 become, the more she pulled away. She finally
broke up with me. I got really depressed again
for a couple of weeks after that. I even started
calling her and hanging up just to hear her voice,
and driving by her work just to see if her car was
there. After about a month I got sick of doing
that—it was just so ridiculous—and at least my
symptoms of depression got better. I mean I’m
eating and sleeping fine, still doing well at work,
and I have plenty of energy and all, but it still
feels as if part of me is missing. It’s like I’m back
at square one, feeling just the same as I have for
years ...”
We resumed therapy.

 It seems clear that as a source of happiness,
romance leaves a lot to be desired. And perhaps
the Dalai Lama was not far off the mark in
rejecting the notion of romance as a basis for a
relationship and in describing romance as merely
“a fantasy ... unattainable,” something not worthy
of our efforts. On closer examination, perhaps he
was objectively describing the nature of romance
rather than providing a negative value judgment
colored by his years of training as a monk. Even
an objective reference source such as the
dictionary, which contains well over a dozen
definitions of “romance” and “romantic,” is
liberally peppered with phrases such as “a
fictitious tale,” “an exaggeration,” “a falsehood,”
“fanciful or imaginative,” “not practical,” “without
a basis in fact,” “characteristic of or preoccupied
with idealized lovemaking or courting,” and so

 on. It is apparent that somewhere along the road
of Western civilization a change has taken place.
The ancient concept of Eros, with the underlying
sense of becoming one, of fusion with another,
has taken on new meaning. Romance has
acquired an artificial quality, with flavors of
fraudulence and deception, the quality that had
led Oscar Wilde to bleakly observe, “When one
is in love, one always begins by deceiving
oneself, and one always ends up by deceiving
others. That is what the world calls a romance.”
Earlier, we explored the role of closeness and
intimacy as an important component of human
happiness. There’s no doubt of this. But if one is
looking for lasting satisfaction in a relationship,
the foundation of that relationship must be solid.
It is for this reason that the Dalai Lama
encourages us to examine the underlying basis of

 a relationship, should we find ourselves in a
relationship that is going sour. Sexual attraction,
or even the intense feeling of falling in love, may
play a role in forming an initial bond between two
people, to draw them together, but like a good
epoxy glue, that initial bonding agent needs to be
mixed with other ingredients before it will harden
into a lasting bond. In identifying these other
ingredients, we turn once again to the Dalai
Lama’s approach to building a strong relationship
—bas—ing our relationship on the qualities of
affection, compassion, and mutual respect as
human beings. Basing a relationship on these
qualities enables us to achieve a deep and
meaningful bond not only with our lover or
spouse but also with friends, acquaintances, or
strangers—virtually any human being. It opens up
unlimited possibilities and opportunities for

 connection.

 Chapter 7

THE VALUE AND BENEFITS OF
COMPASSION

 DEFINING COMPASSION

As our conversations progressed, I discovered
that the devel- A opment of compassion plays a
far greater role in the Dalai Lama’s life than
simply a means to cultivating a feeling of warmth
and affection, a means of improving our
relationship with others. It became clear, in fact,
that as a practicing Buddhist, the development of
compassion was an integral part of his spiritual
path.
“Given the importance that Buddhism places
on compassion as an essential part of one’s
spiritual development,” I asked, “can you more
clearly define what you mean by ‘compassion’?”
The Dalai Lama replied, “Compassion can be

 roughly defined in terms of a state of mind that is
nonviolent, nonharming, and nonaggressive. It is a
mental attitude based on the wish for others to be
free of their suffering and is associated with a
sense of commitment, responsibility, and respect
towards the other.
“In discussing the definition of compassion,
the Tibetan word Tse-wa, there is also a sense to
the word of its being a state of mind that can
include a wish for good things for oneself. In
developing compassion, perhaps one could begin
with the wish that oneself be free of suffering, and
then take that natural feeling towards oneself and
cultivate it, enhance it, and extend it out o include
and embrace others.
“Now, when people speak of compassion, I
think that there is often a danger of confusing
compassion with attachment. So when we

 discuss compassion, we must first make a
distinction between two types of love or
compassion. One kind of compassion is tinged
with attachment—the feeling of controlling
someone, or loving someone so that person will
love you back. This ordinary type of love or
compassion is quite partial and biased. And a
relationship based on that alone is unstable. That
kind of partial relationship, based on perceiving
and identifying the person as a friend, may lead to
a certain emotional attachment and feeling of
closeness. But if there is a slight change in the
situation, a disagreement perhaps, or if your
friend does something to make you angry, then all
of a sudden your mental projection changes; the
concept of‘my friend’ is no longer there. Then
you’ll find the emotional attachment evaporating,
and instead of that feeling of love and concern,

 you may have a feeling of hatred. So, that kind of
love, based on attachment, can be closely linked
with hatred.
“But there is a second type of compassion
that is free from such attachment. That is genuine
compassion. That kind of compassion isn’t so
much based on the fact that this person or that
person is dear to me. Rather, genuine
compassion is based on the rationale that all
human beings have an innate desire to be happy
and overcome suffering, just like myself. And,
just like myself, they have the natural right to fulfill
this fundamental aspiration. On the basis of the
recognition of this equality and commonality, you
develop a sense of affinity and closeness with
others. With this as a foundation, you can feel
compassion regardless of whether you view the
other person as a friend or an enemy. It is based

 on the other’s fundamental rights rather than your
own mental projection. Upon this basis, then, you
will generate love and compassion. That’s
genuine compassion.
“So, one can see how making the distinction
between these two kinds of compassion and
cultivating genuine compassion can be quite
important in our day-to-day life. For instance, in
marriage there is generally a component of
emotional attachment. But I think that if there is a
component of genuine compassion as well, based
on mutual respect as two human beings, the
marriage tends to last a long time. In the case of
emotional attachment without compassion, the
marriage is more unstable and tends to end more
quickly.”
The idea of developing a different kind of
compassion, a more universal compassion, a kind

 of generic compassion divorced from personal
feeling, seemed like a tall order. Turning it over in
my mind, as if thinking aloud, I asked, “But love
or compassion is a subjective feeling. It seems
that the emotional tone or feeling of love or
compassion would be the same whether it was
‘tinged with attachment’ or ’genuine.‘ So if the
person would experience the same emotion or
feeling in both types, why is it important to
distinguish between the two?”
With a decisive tone, the Dalai Lama
answered, “First, I think that there is a different
quality between the feeling of genuine love, or
compassion, and love based on attachment. It’s
not the same feeling. The feeling of genuine
compassion is much stronger, much wider; it has
a very profound quality. Also, genuine love and
compassion are much more stable, more reliable.

 For example, if you see an animal intensely
suffering, like a fish writhing with a hook in its
mouth, you might spontaneously experience a
feeling of not being able to bear its pain. That
feeling isn’t based on a special connection with
that particular animal, a feeling of‘Oh, that animal
is my friend.’ In that case you’re basing your
compassion simply on the fact that that being also
has feeling, can experience pain, and has a right
not to experience such pain. So, that type of
compassion, not mixed with desire or attachment,
is much more sound, and more durable in the
long run.”
Moving deeper into the subject of
compassion, I continued, “Now in your example
of seeing a fish intensely suffering with a hook in
its mouth, you bring up a vital point—that it is
associated with a feeling of not being able to bear

 its pain.”
“Yes,” said the Dalai Lama. “In fact, in one
sense one could define compassion as the feeling
of unbearableness at the sight of other people’s
suffering, other sentient being’s suffering. And in
order to generate that feeling one must first have
an appreciation of the seriousness or intensity of
another’s suffering. So, I think that the more fully
one understands suffering, and the various kinds
of suffering that we are subject to, the deeper will
be one’s level of compassion.”
I raised the question, “Well, I appreciate the
fact that greater awareness of other’s suffering
can enhance our capacity for compassion. In
fact, by definition, compassion involves opening
oneself to another’s suffering. Sharing another’s
suffering. But there’s a more basic question: Why
would we want to take on another’s suffering

 when we don’t even want our own? I mean,
most of us go to great lengths to avoid our own
pain and suffering, even to the point of taking
drugs and so on. Why would we then
deliberately take on someone else’s suffering?”
Without hesitation the Dalai Lama responded,
“I feel that there is a significant difference
between your own suffering and the suffering you
might experience in a compassionate state in
which you take upon yourself and share other
people’s suffering—a qualitative difference.” He
paused, and then as if effortlessly targeting my
own feelings at the moment, he continued, “When
you think about your own suffering, there is a
feeling of being totally overwhelmed. There is a
sense of being burdened, of being pressed under
something—a feeling of helplessness. There’s a
dullness, almost as if your faculties have become

 numb.
“Now, in generating compassion, when you
are taking on another’s suffering, you may also
initially experience a certain degree of discomfort,
a sense of uncomfortableness or unbearableness.
But in the case of compassion, the feeling is much
different; underlying the uncomfortable feeling is a
very high level of alertness and determination
because you are voluntarily and deliberately
accepting another’s suffering for a higher
purpose. There is a feeling of connectedness and
commitment, a willingness to reach out to others,
a feeling of freshness rather than dullness. This is
similar to the case of an athlete. While undergoing
rigorous training, an athlete may suffer a lot—
working out, sweating, straining. I think it can be
quite a painful and exhausting experience. But the
athlete doesn’t see it as a painful experience. The

 athlete would take it as a great accomplishment,
an experience associated with a sense of joy. But
if the same person were subject to some other
physical work that was not part of his athletic
training, then the athlete would think, ‘Oh, why
have I been subjected to this terrible ordeal?’ So
the mental attitude makes a tremendous
difference.”
These few words, spoken with such
conviction, lifted me from an oppressed feeling to
one of a feeling of the possibility of the resolution
of suffering, of transcending suffering.
“You mention that the first step in generating
that kind of compassion is an appreciation of
suffering. But are there any other specific
Buddhist techniques used to enhance one’s
compassion?”
“Yes. For example in the Mahayana tradition

 of Buddhism we find two principal techniques for
cultivating compassion. These are known as
the‘seven-point cause-and-effect’ method and
the ’exchange and equality of oneself with
others.‘ The ’exchange-and-equality’ method is
the technique that you’ll find in the eighth chapter
of Shantideva’s Guide to the Bodhisattuas Way
of Life. But,” he said, glancing at his watch and
realizing that our time was running out, “I think
that we will practice some exercises or
meditations on compassion during the public talks
later this week.”
With this, he smiled warmly and rose to end
our session.

 THE REAL VATUE OF HUMAN
LIFE

Continuing our discussion of compassion in
our next conversation, I began, “Now, we’ve
been speaking about the importance of
compassion, about your belief that human
affection, warmth, friendship, and so on are
conditions absolutely necessary for happiness.
But I’m just wondering—suppose, let’s say, a
wealthy businessman came to you and said,
‘Your Holiness, you say that warmth and
compassion are crucial for one to be happy. But
by nature I’m just not a very warm or
affectionate person. To be honest I really don’t

 feel particularly compassionate or altruistic. I tend
to be a rather rational, practical, and perhaps
intellectual person, and I just don’t feel those
kinds of emotions. Yet, I feel good about my life,
I feel happy with my life the way it is. I have a
very successful business, friends, and I provide
for my wife and children and seem to have a
good relationship with them. I just don’t feel that
anything is missing. Developing compassion,
altruism, warmth, and so on sounds nice, but for
me, what’s the point? It just seems so sentimental
...”’
“First of all,” the Dalai Lama replied, “if a
person said that, I would still have doubts
whether that person was really happy deep
down. I truly believe that compassion provides
the basis of human survival, the real value of
human life, and without that there is a basic piece

 missing. A deep sensitivity to other’s feelings is
an element of love and compassion, and without
that, for example, I think there would be
problems in the man’s ability to relate with his
wife. If the person really had that attitude of
indifference to other’s suffering and feelings, then
even if he was a billionaire, had a good
education, had no problems with his family or
children, and was surrounded with friends, other
rich businesspeople, politicians, and leaders of
nations, I think that in spite of all these things that
the effect of all these positive things would just
remain on the surface.
“But if he continued to maintain that he didn’t
feel compassion, yet he didn’t feel anything
missing ... then it might be a little bit difficult to
help him understand the importance of
compassion ...”

 The Dalai Lama stopped speaking for a
moment to reflect. His intermittent pauses, which
occurred throughout our conversations, did not
seem to create an awkward silence; rather, they
were like a gravitational force, gathering greater
weight and meaning to his words when the
conversation resumed.
Finally, he continued, “Still, even if that was
the case, there are several things that I could
point out. First, I might suggest that he reflect on
his own experience. He can see that if someone
treats him with compassion and affection, then it
makes him feel happy. So, on the basis of that
experience, it would help him realize that other
people also feel good when they are shown
warmth and compassion. Therefore, recognizing
this fact might make him more respectful of other
people’s emotional sensitivity and make him

 more inclined to give them compassion and
warmth. At the same time he would discover that
the more you give others warmth, the more
warmth you receive. I don’t think that it would
take him very long to realize that. And as a result,
this becomes the basis of mutual trust and
friendship.
“Now suppose this man had all these material
facilities, was successful in life, surrounded by
friends, financially secure, and so on. I think it is
even possible that his family and children might
relate to him and experience a kind of
contentment because the man is successful and
they have plenty of money and a comfortable life.
I think that it is conceivable that up to a certain
point, even without feeling human warmth and
affection, he may not experience a feeling of
lacking something. But if he felt that everything

 was OK, that there was no real requirement for
developing compassion, I would suggest that this
view is due to ignorance and shortsightedness.
Even if it appeared that others were relating to
him quite fully, in reality what is happening is that
much of the people’s relationship or interaction
with him is based on theirperception ofhim as a
successful, wealthy resource. They may be
influenced by his wealth and power and relate to
that rather than to the person himself. So in some
sense, although they may not receive human
warmth and affection from him, they may be
contented; they may not expect more. But what
happens is if his fortune declined, then that basis
of the relationship would weaken. Then he would
begin to see the effect of not having warmth and
immediately begin to suffer.
“However, if people have compassion,

 naturally that’s something they can count on; even
if they have economic problems and their fortune
declines, they still have something to share with
fellow human beings. World economies are
always so tenuous and we are subject to so many
losses in life, but a compassionate attitude is
something that we can always carry with us.”
A maroon-robed attendant entered the room
and silently poured tea, as the Dalai Lama
continued, “Of course, in attempting to explain to
someone the importance of compassion, in some
cases, you might be dealing with a very
hardened, individualistic, and selfish person,
someone concerned only with her or his own
interests. And it is even possible that there are
people who may not have the capacity to
empathize with even someone whom they love or
who may be close to them. But even to such

 people, it is still possible to present the
importance of compassion and love on the
grounds that it’s the best way to fulfill their selfinterests. They wish to have good health, live a
longer life, and have peace of mind, happiness,
and joy. And if these are things that they desire,
I’ve heard that there is even scientific evidence
that these things can be enhanced by feelings of
love and compassion ... But as a doctor, a
psychiatrist, perhaps you would know better
about these scientific claims?”
“Yes,” I agreed. “I think there is definitely
supporting scientific evidence to back up the
claims about the physical and emotional benefits
of compassionate states of mind.”
“So I think that educating someone about
these facts and scientific studies couldcertainly
encourage some people to cultivate a more

 compassionate state of mind ... ,” the Dalai Lama
commented. “But I think that even aside from
these scientific studies, there are other arguments
that people could understand and appreciate
from their own practical or direct everyday
experience. For example, you could point out
that lack of compassion leads to a certain
ruthlessness. There are many examples indicating
that at some level deep down, ruthless people
generally suffer from a kind of unhappiness and
discontent, people like Stalin and Hitler. Such
people suffer from a kind of nagging sense of
insecurity and fear. Even when they are sleeping I
think that sense of fear remains ... All that might
be very difficult for some people to understand,
but one thing you could say is that these people
lack something that you can find in a more
compassionate person—a sense of freedom, a

 sense of abandonment, so when you sleep you
can relax and let go. Ruthless people never have
that experience. Something is always gripping
them; there is some kind of hold on them, and
they aren’t able to experience that feeling of
letting go, that sense of freedom.”
He paused for a moment, absently scratching
his head, then continued, “Although I’m just
speculating, I would guess that if you asked some
of these ruthless people, ‘When were you
happier, during your childhood, when you were
being cared for by your mother and had more of
a closeness with your family, or now, when you
have more power, influence and position?’ I think
they would say that their youth was more
pleasant. I think even Stalin was loved by his
mother in childhood.”
“In bringing up Stalin,” I observed, “I think

 you’ve hit on a perfect example of what you’re
saying, of the consequences of living without
compassion. It’s well known that the two main
features that characterized his personality were
his ruthlessness and his suspiciousness. He
viewed ruthlessness as a virtue, in fact, and
changed his name from Djugashvili to Stalin,
meaning ‘man of steel.’ And as his life
progressed, the more ruthless he became, the
more suspicious he became. His suspiciousness
was legendary. His fearfulness and
suspiciousness of others eventually led to massive
purges and campaigns against various groups of
people in his country, resulting in the
imprisonment and execution of millions. But he
still continued to see enemies everywhere. Not
long before his death he told Nikita Khrushchev,
‘I trust no one, not even myself.’ In the end he

 even turned on his most faithful staff. And clearly
the more ruthless and powerful he became, the
more unhappy he was. One friend said that finally
the only human trait he had left was his
unhappiness. And his daughter Svetlana
described how he was plagued by loneliness and
an emptiness inside and got to the point that he
no longer believed that people were capable of
being genuinely sincere or warmhearted.
“Anyway, I know it would be very difficult to
understand people like Stalin and why they did
the horrible things that they did. But one of the
points that we’re talking about is that even these
extreme examples of ruthless people might look
back with nostalgia on some of the more pleasant
aspects of their childhood, such as the love they
received from their mothers. But where does that
leave the many people who didn’t have pleasant

 childhoods or loving mothers? People who were
abused and so on? Now, we are discussing the
topic of compassion. In order for people to
develop the capacity for compassion, don’t you
think that it’s necessary for them to be raised by
parents or care-takers who showed them warmth
and affection?”
“Yes, I think that’s important.” He paused,
deftly and automatically rotating his rosary
between his fingers as he reflected. “There are
some people who, right from the beginning, have
suffered much and have lacked other’s affection
—so that later in life it seems almost as if they
have no human feeling, no capacity for
compassion and affection, those who are
hardened and brutal....” The Dalai Lama paused
again, and for several moments seemed to
ponder the question earnestly. As he bent over

 his tea, even the contour of his shoulders
suggested that he was deep in thought. He
showed no inclination to continue immediately,
however, and we drank our tea in silence. Finally
he shrugged his shoulders, as if acknowledging
that he had no solution.
“So do you think that techniques to enhance
empathy and develop compassion would not be
helpful to people with that sort of difficult
background?”
“There are always different degrees of benefit
that one might receive from practicing various
methods and techniques, depending on one’s
particular circumstances,” he explained. “It’s also
possible that in some cases these techniques may
not be effective at all ...”
Trying to clarify, I interrupted, “And the
specific techniques to enhance compassion that

 you’re referring to are ... ?”
“Just what we have been talking about. First,
through learning, thoroughly understanding the
value of compassion—this gives you a feeling of
conviction and determination. Then, employing
methods to enhance empathy, such as using your
imagination, your creativity, to visualize yourself
in another’s situation. And later this week in the
public talks we’ll discuss certain exercises or
practices that you can undertake, such as the
practice of Tong-Len, that serves to strengthen
your compassion. But I think it’s important to
remember that these techniques, such as the
practice of Tong-Len, were developed to help as
many as possible, at least some portion of the
human population. But it was never expected that
these techniques could help 100 percent of
people, the entire human population.

 “But the main point really ... if we are talking
about various methods to develop compassion—
the important thing is that people make a sincere
effort to develop their capacity for compassion.
The degree to which they will actually be able to
cultivate compassion depends on so many
variables, who can tell? But if they make their
best efforts to be kinder, to cultivate compassion
and make the world a better place, then at the
end of the day they can say, ‘At least I’ve done
my best!’”

 THE BENEFITS OF COMPASSION

In recent years there have been many studies that
support the idea that developing compassion and
altruism has a positive impact on our physical and
emotional health. In one well-known experiment,
for example, David McClelland, a psychologist at
Harvard University, showed a group of students
a film of Mother Teresa working among
Calcutta’s sick and poor. The students reported
that the film stimulated feelings of compassion.
Afterward, he analyzed the students’ saliva and
found an increase in immunoglobulin-A, an
antibody that can help fight respiratory infections.
In another study done by James House at the
University of Michigan Research Center,

 investigators found that doing regular volunteer
work, interacting with others in a warm and
compassionate way, dramatically increased life
expectancy, and probably overall vitality as well.
Many other researchers in the new field of mindbody medicine have demonstrated similar
findings, documenting that positive states of mind
can improve our physical health.
In addition to the beneficial effects on one’s
physical health, there is evidence that compassion
and caring behavior contribute to good emotional
health. Studies have shown that reaching out to
help others can induce a feeling of happiness, a
calmer mind, and less depression. In a thirty-year
study of a group of Harvard graduates,
researcher George Vaillant concluded, in fact,
that adopting an altruistic lifestyle is a critical
component of good mental health. Another

 survey by Allan Luks, conducted with several
thousand people who were regularly involved in
volunteer activities that helped others, revealed
that over 90 percent of these volunteers reported
a kind of “high” associated with the activity,
characterized by a feeling of warmth, more
energy, and a kind of euphoria. They also had a
distinct feeling of calmness and enhanced selfworth following the activity. Not only did these
caring behaviors provide an interaction that was
emotionally nourishing, but it was also found that
this “helper’s calm” was linked to relief from a
variety of stress-related physical disorders as
well.
While the scientific evidence clearly backs up
the Dalai Lama’s position on the very real and
practical value of compassion, one needn’t rely
solely on experiments and surveys to confirm the

 truth of this view. We can discover the close links
between caring, compassion, and personal
happiness in our own lives and in the lives of
those around us. Joseph, a sixty-year-old
building contractor whom I first met some years
ago, serves as a good illustration of this. For
thirty years Joseph rode the gravy train,
capitalizing on a seemingly limitless construction
boom in Arizona to become a multimillionaire. In
the late 1980s, however, came the biggest real
estate crash in Arizona’s history. Joseph was
heavily leveraged and lost everything. He ended
up declaring bankruptcy. His financial problems
created a strain on his marriage, which finally
resulted in a divorce after twenty-five years of
marriage. Not surprisingly, Joseph didn’t take all
this very well. He started drinking heavily.
Fortunately, he was able to eventually quit

 drinking with the help of AA. As part of his AA
program he became a sponsor and helped other
alcoholics stay sober. He discovered that he
enjoyed his role as a sponsor, reaching out to
help others, and started volunteering in other
organizations as well. He put his business
knowledge to use in helping the economically
underprivileged. In talking about his current life,
Joseph said, “I own a very small remodeling
business now. It brings a modest income, but I
realize that I’ll never be as rich as I once was.
The funny thing is, though, that I don’t really want
that kind of money again. I much prefer spending
my time volunteering for different groups,
working directly with people, helping them out
the best I can. These days, I get more pure
enjoyment out of one day than I did in a month
when I was makin’ the big money. I’m happier

 than I’ve ever been in my life!”

 MEDITATION ON COMPASSION

As promised during the course of our
conversations, true to his word, the Dalai Lama
concluded one public talk in Arizona with a
meditation on compassion. It was a simple
exercise. Yet in a powerful and elegant way, he
seemed to summarize and crystallize his previous
discussion of compassion, turning it into a formal
five-minute exercise that was direct and to the
point.

“In generating compassion, you start by
recognizing that you do not want suffering and

 that you have a right to have happiness. This can
be verified or validated by your own experience.
You then recognize that other people, just like
yourself, also do not want to suffer and that they
have a right to have happiness. So this becomes
the basis of your beginning to generate
compassion.
“So ... let us meditate on compassion today.
Begin by visualizing a person who is acutely
suffering, someone who is in pain or is in a very
unfortunate situation. For the first three minutes of
the meditation, reflect on that individual’s
suffering in a more analytic way—think about
their intense suffering and the unfortunate state of
that person’s existence. After thinking about that
person’s suffering for a few minutes, next, try to
relate that to yourself, thinking, ‘that individual
has the same capacity for experiencing pain, joy,

 happiness, and suffering that I do.’ Then, try to
allow your natural response to arise—a natural
,feeling of compassion towards that person. Try
to arrive at a conclusion: thinking how strongly
you wish for that person to be free from that
suffering. And resolve that you will help that
person to be relieved from their suffering. Finally,
place your mind single-pointedly on that kind of
conclusion or resolution, and for the last few
minutes of the meditation try to simply generate
your mind in a compassionate or loving state.”

With that, the Dalai Lama assumed a crosslegged meditation posture, remaining completely
immobile as he practiced the meditation along
with the audience. Stark silence. But there was
something quite stirring about sitting among the

 assembly that morning. I imagine that even the
most-hardened individual could not help being
moved when surrounded by fifteen hundred
people, every one of them holding the thought of
compassion in their minds. After a few minutes,
the Dalai Lama broke into a low Tibetan chant,
his voice deep, melodic, gently breaking and
falling in tones that soothed, comforted.

 Part III

TRANSFORMING SUFFERING

 Chapter 8

FACING SUFFERING

In the time of the Buddha, a woman
named Kisagotami suffered the death of
her only child. Unable to accept it, she ran

 from person to person, seeking a medicine
to restore her child to life. The Buddha
was said to have such a medicine.
Kisagotami went to the Buddha, paid
homage, and asked, “Can you make a
medicine that will restore my child?”
“I know of such a medicine,” the
Buddha replied. “But in order to make it, I
must have certain ingredients.”
Relieved, the woman asked, “What
ingredients do you require?”
“Bring me a handful of mustard seed,”
said the Buddha.
The woman promised to procure it for
him, but as she was leaving, he added, “I
require the mustard seed be taken from a
household where no child, spouse, parent,
or servant has died.”

 The woman agreed and began going
from house to house in search of the
mustard seed. At each house the people
agreed to give her the seed, but when she
asked them if anyone had died in that
household, she could find no home where
death had not visited—in one house a
daughter, in another a servant, in others a
husband or parent had died. Kisagotami
was not able to find a home free from the
suffering of death. Seeing she was not
alone in her grief, the mother let go of her
child’s lifeless body and returned to the
Buddha, who said with great compassion,
“You thought that you alone had lost a
son; the law of death is that among all
living creatures there is no permanence.”

 Kisagotami’s search taught her that no one lives
free from suffering and loss. She hadn’t been
singled out for this terrible misfortune. This insight
didn’t eliminate the inevitable suffering that comes
from loss, but it did reduce the suffering that
came from struggling against this sad fact of life.
Although pain and suffering are universal
human phenomena, that doesn’t mean we have
an easy time accepting them. Human beings have
devised a vast repertoire of strategies for
avoiding having to experience suffering.
Sometimes we use external means, such as
chemicals—deadening and medicating our
emotional pain with drugs or alcohol. We have an
array of internal mechanisms as well—
psychological defenses, often unconscious, that
buffer us from feeling too much emotional pain
and anguish when we are confronted with

 problems. Sometimes these defense mechanisms
can be quite primitive, such as simply refusing to
recognize that a problem exists. At other times,
we may vaguely recognize that we have a
problem but immerse ourselves in a million
distractions or entertainments to avoid thinking
about it. Or we might use projection—unable to
accept that we have a problem, we
unconsciously projectitonto others and blame
them for our suffering: “Yeah, I’m miserable. But
it’s not me that has the problem; it’s someone
else who has the problem. If it wasn’t for that
damn boss constantly giving me a hard time [or
”my partner ignoring me“ or ... ], I’d be fine.”
Suffering can only be avoided temporarily.
But like a disease that’s left untreated (or
perhaps superficially treated with medication that
just masks the symptoms but doesn’t cure the

 underlying condition), the disease invariably
festers and worsens. The high from drugs or
alcohol certainly eases our pain for a while, but
with continued use, the physical damage to our
bodies and the social damage to our lives can
cause far more suffering than the diffuse
dissatisfaction or the acute emotional pain that led
us to these substances in the first place. The
internal psychological defenses like denial or
repression may shield and protect us from feeling
the pain a bit longer, but it still doesn’t make the
suffering disappear.
Randall lost his father to cancer a little over a
year ago. He was quite close to his father, and at
the time everyone was surprised by how well he
was taking the death. “Of course I’m sad,” he
explained in a stoic tone. “But really I’m fine. I’ll
miss him, but life goes on. And anyway, I can’t

 focus on missing him right now; I have to arrange
the funeral and take care of his estate for my
mom ... But I’ll be fine,” he reassured everyone.
One year later, however, shortly after the
anniversary of his father’s death, Randall began
to spiral into a severe depression. He came to
see me and explained, “I just can’t understand
what is causing this depression. Everything seems
to be going well right now. It can’t be the death
of my father; he died over a year ago, and I’ve
already come to terms with his death.” With very
little therapy it became clear, however, that in
struggling to keep a tight reign on his emotions, in
order to “be strong,” he had never fully dealt with
his feelings of loss and grief. These feelings
continued to grow until finally manifesting as an
overpowering depression that he was forced to
deal with.

 In Randall’s case, his depression lifted rather
quickly as we focused on his pain and feelings of
loss, and he was able to fully confront and
experience his grief. Sometimes, however, our
unconscious strategies to avoid facing our
problems are more deep-seated—deeply
ingrained coping mechanisms that can become
embedded in our personality and are hard to
extract. Most of us know a friend, acquaintance,
or family member, for example, who avoids
problems by projecting onto others and blaming
them—accusing others of having faults that, in
fact, are his or her own. This certainly isn’t an
effective method of eliminating problems,
however, and many of these individuals are
condemned to a lifetime of unhappiness as long
as they continue in that pattern.

 The Dalai Lama detailed his approach to human
suffering—an approach that ultimately includes a
belief in the possibility of freedom from suffering
but starts with accepting suffering as a natural fact
of human existence, and courageously facing our
problems head-on.

In our daily lives problems are bound to arise.
The biggest problems in our lives are the ones
that we inevitably have to face, like old age,
illness, and death. Trying to avoid our problems
or simply not thinking about them may provide
temporary relief, but I think that there is a better

 approach. If you directly confront your suffering,
you will be in a better position to appreciate the
depth and nature of the problem. If you are in a
battle, as long as you remain ignorant of the
status and combat capability of your enemy, you
will be totally unprepared and paralyzed by fear.
However, if you know the fighting capability of
your opponents, what sort of weapons they have
and so on, then you’re in a much better position
when you engage in the war. In the same way, if
you confront your problems rather than avoid
them, you will be in a better position to deal with
them.“
This approach to one’s problems was clearly
reasonable, but pressing the issue a bit further, I
asked, “Yes, but what if you directly confront a
problem, and find out that there’s no solution?
That’s pretty tough to face.”

 “But I think it’s still better to face it,” he
replied with a martial spirit. “For example, you
might consider things like old age and death as
negative, unwanted, and simply try to forget
about them. But eventually these things will come
anyway. And if you’ve avoided thinking about
these things, when the day comes that any of
these events occur, it will come as a shock
causing an unbearable mental uneasiness.
However, if you spend some time thinking about
old age, death, and these other unfortunate
things, your mind will be much more stable when
these things happen as you have already become
acquainted with these problems and kinds of
suffering and have anticipated that they will
occur.
“That’s why I believe it can be useful to
prepare yourself ahead of time by familiarizing

 yourself with the kinds of suffering you might
encounter. To use the battle analogy again,
reflecting on suffering could be seen as a military
exercise. People who never heard of war, guns,
bombing, and so on might faint if they had to go
into battle. But through military drills you could
familiarize your mind with what might occur, so if
a war erupted, it would not be so hard on you.”
“Well, I can see how familiarizing ourselves
with the kinds of suffering we might encounter
would have some value in reducing fear and
apprehension, but it still seems that sometimes
certain dilemmas present no option but the
possibility of suffering. How can we avoid worry
in those circumstances?”
“A dilemma such as?”
I stopped to consider. “Well, let’s say, for
example, that a woman is pregnant and they do

 an amniocentesis or sonogram and find out that
the child will have a significant birth defect. They
discover that the child will have some extreme
mental or physical handicap. So, obviously the
woman is filled with anxiety because she doesn’t
know what to do. She can choose to do
something about the situation and get an abortion,
to save the baby from a life of suffering, but then
she will experience a feeling of great loss and
pain and perhaps she will also experience other
feelings such as guilt. Or, she can choose to let
nature take its course and have the baby. But
then, she may be faced with a lifetime of hardship
and suffering for herself and the child.”
The Dalai Lama listened intently as I spoke.
With a somewhat wistful tone, he replied,
“Whether one approaches these problems from
the Western or the Buddhist perspective, these

 kinds of dilemmas are very difficult, very difficult.
Now your example regarding the decision to
abort the fetus with a birth defect—nobody really
knows what would be better in the long run.
Even if a child is born with a defect, maybe in the
long run it would be better for the mother or the
family or the child itself. But also there’s the
possibility that taking into account the long-term
consequences, it is better to abort; maybe that
could be more positive in the long run. But then
who decides? It’s very difficult. Even from the
Buddhist viewpoint, that sort of judgment is
beyond our rational ability.” He paused, then
added, “I think, though, that their background
and beliefs would play a role in how particular
individuals might respond to this kind of difficult
situation ...”
We sat in silence.

 Shaking his head, he finally said, “By
reflecting on the types of sufferingthatwe are
subjectto, you can mentally prepare for these
things ahead of time to some degree, by
reminding yourself about the fact that you may
come across these kinds of dilemmatic situations
in your life. So you can prepare yourself mentally.
But you should not forget the fact that this does
not alleviate the situation. It may help you
mentally cope with it, reduce the fear and so on,
but it does not alleviate the problem itself. For
instance, if a child with a birth defect is going to
be born, no matter how strongly you thought
about it ahead of time, you still have to find a way
to handle it. So this is still difficult.”
As he said this there was a note of sadness in
his voice—more than a note, perhaps a chord.
But the underlying melody was not one of

 hopelessness. For a full minute, the Dalai Lama
stopped speaking once again, gazing out the
window as if looking out onto the world at large,
then continued, “There’s really no avoiding the
fact that suffering is part of life. And of course we
have a natural tendency to dislike our suffering
and problems. But I think that ordinarily people
don’t view the very nature of our existence to be
characterized by suffering ...” The Dalai Lama
suddenly began to laugh, “I mean on your
birthday people usually say, ‘Happy Birthday!,’
when actually the day of your birth was the birth
of your suffering. But nobody says, ‘Happy
Birth-of-Sufferingday!” he joked.
“In accepting that suffering is part of your
daily existence, you could begin by examining the
factors that normally give rise to feelings of
discontent and mental unhappiness. Generally

 speaking, for instance, you feel happy if you or
people close to you receive praise, fame, fortune,
and other pleasant things. And you feel unhappy
and discontent if you don’t achieve these things
or if your rival is receiving them. If you look at
your normal day-to day life, however, you often
find that there are so many factors and conditions
that cause pain, suffering, and feelings of
dissatisfaction, whereas the conditions that give
rise to joy and happiness are comparatively rare.
This is something that we have to undergo,
whether we like it or not. And since this is the
reality of our existence, our attitude towards
suffering may need to be modified. Our attitude
towards suffering becomes very important
because it can affect how we cope with
suffering when it arises. Now, our usual
attitude consists of an intense aversion and

 intolerance of our pain and suffering. However,
if we can transform our attitude towards
suffering, adopt an attitude that allows us
greater tolerance of it, then this can do much
to help counteract feelings of mental
unhappiness, dissatisfaction, and discontent.
“For me personally, the strongest and most
effective practice to help tolerate suffering is to
see and understand that suffering is the underlying
nature of Samsara,4 of unenlightened exis ence.
Now when you experience some physical pain or
other problem, of course at that moment there is
a feeling of ‘Oh! This suffering is so bad!’
There’s a feeling of rejection associated with the
suffering, a kind of feeling of ‘Oh, I shouldn’t be
experiencing this.’But at that moment if you can
look at the situation from another angle and
realize that this very body...,“ he slapped an arm

 in demonstration, ”is the very basis of suffering,
then this reduces that feeling of rejection—that
feeling that somehow you don’t deserve to suffer,
that you are a victim. So, once you understand
and accept this reality, then you experience
suffering as something that is quite natural.
“So, for example, when dealing with the
suffering the Tibetan people have undergone, in
one way you could look at the situation and feel
overwhelmed, wondering, ‘How in the world has
this happened?’ But from another angle you
could reflect on the fact that Tibet also is in the
middle of Samsara,” he laughed, “as is this planet
and the whole galaxy.” He laughed again.
“So, anyway, I think that how you perceive
life as a whole plays a role in your attitude about
suffering. For instance, if your basic outlook is
that suffering is negative and must be avoided at

 all costs and in some sense is a sign of failure, this
will add a distinct psychological component of
anxiety and intolerance when you encounter
difficult circumstances, a feeling of being
overwhelmed. On the other hand, if your basic
outlook accepts that suffering is a natural part of
your existence, this will undoubtedly make you
more tolerant towards the adversities of life. And
without a certain degree of tolerance towards
your suffering, your life becomes miserable; then
it’s like having a very bad night. That night seems
eternal; it never seems to end.”
“It seems to me that when you speak about
the underlying nature of existence as being
characterized by suffering, as basically
unsatisfactory, that sounds like a pretty
pessimistic view, really discouraging in fact,” I
noted.

 The Dalai Lama quickly clarified, “When I
speak of the unsatisfactory nature of existence,
one needs to understand that this is in the context
of the overall Buddhist path. These reflections
have to be understood in their proper context,
which is within the framework of the Buddhist
path. Unless this view of suffering is seen in its
proper context, I agree that there is a danger, or
even a likelihood, of misunderstanding this type
of approach as being rather pessimistic and
negative. Consequently, it’s important to
understand the basic Buddhist stance towards the
whole issue of suffering. We find that in Buddha’s
own public teachings, the first thing he taught was
the principle of the Four Noble Truths, the first of
which is the Truth of Suffering. And here, a lot of
emphasis is placed on the realization of the
suffering nature of one’s existence.

 “The point that has to be borne in mind is that
the reason why reflection on suffering is so
important is because there is a possibility of a
way out; there is an alternative. There is a
Possibility of freedom from suffering. By
removing the causes of suffering, it is possible to
attain a state of Liberation, a state free from
suffering. According to Buddhist thought, the root
causes of suffering are ignorance, craving, and
hatred. These are called the ‘three poisons of the
mind.’These terms have specific connotations
when used within a Buddhist context. For
example, ‘ignorance’ doesn’t refer to a lack of
information as it is used in an everyday sense but
rather refers to a fundamental misperception of
the true nature of the self and all phenomena. By
generating insight into the true nature of reality
and eliminating afflictive states of mind such as

 craving and hatred, one can achieve a completely
purified state of mind, free from suffering. Within
a Buddhist context, when one reflects on the fact
that one’s ordinary day-to-day existence is
characterized by suffering, this serves to
encourage one to engage in the practices that will
eliminate the root causes of one’s suffering.
Otherwise, if there was no hope, or no possibility
of freedom from suffering, mere reflection on
suffering just becomes morbid thinking, and
would be quite negative.”

As he spoke, I began to sense how reflecting on
our “suffering nature” could play a role in
accepting life’s inevitable sorrows and could even

 be a valuable method of putting our daily
problems in proper perspective. And I began to
perceive how suffering might even be seen in a
wider context, as part of a greater spiritual path,
particularly in view of the Buddhist paradigm,
which recognizes the possibility of purifying the
mind and ultimately achieving a state in which
there is no more suffering. But, turning away from
these grand philosophical speculations, I was
curious to learn how the Dalai Lama dealt with
suffering on a more personal level, how he
handled the loss of a loved one, for instance.
When I first visited Dharamsala many years
ago, I had gotten to know the Dalai Lama’s older
brother, Lobsang Samden. I became quite fond
of him and was saddened to hear of his sudden
death a few years back. Knowing that he and the
Dalai Lama were particularly close, I said, “I

 imagine that the death of your brother Lobsang
was very hard on you ...”
“Yes.”
“I was just wondering how you handled that.”
“Of course, I was very, very sad when I
learned of his death,” he said quietly.
“And how did you deal with that feeling of
sadness? I mean was there something in
particular that helped you get over it?”
“I don’t know,” he said pensively. “I felt that
feeling of sadness for some weeks, but that
feeling gradually lifted. Still, there was a feeling of
regret ...”
“Regret?”
“Yes. I was gone at the time he died, and I
think if I had been there, maybe there was
something I could have done to help. So I have
this feeling of regret.”

 A lifetime of contemplating the inevitability of
human suffering may have played a role in helping
the Dalai Lama accept his loss, but it did not
create a cold emotionless individual with grim
resignation in the face of suffering—the sadness
in his voice revealed a man with deep human
feeling. At the same time, his candor and
frankness of manner, completely devoid of selfpity or self-recrimination, created the
unmistakable impression of a man who had fully
accepted his loss.
On that day, our conversation had lasted well
into the late afternoon. Daggers of golden light,
cutting through wooden shutters, were slowly
advancing across the darkening room. I sensed a
melancholy atmosphere pervading the room and
knew that our discussion was coming to the end.
Yet I hoped to question him in greater detail

 about the issue of loss, to see if he had additional
advice about how to survive the death of a loved
one, other than simply accepting the inevitability
of human suffering.
As I was about to expand on the subject,
however, he appeared somewhat distracted, and
I noticed a cast of weariness around his eyes.
Shortly, his secretary quietly entered the room
and gave me The Look: honed by years of
practice, it indicated that it was time to leave.
“Yes ... ,” the Dalai Lama said apologetically,
“perhaps we should close ... I’m a bit tired.”
The next day, before I had an opportunity to
return to the subject in our private conversations,
the issue was raised in his public talk. An
audience member, clearly in pain, asked the Dalai
Lama, “Do you have any suggestions about how
to handle a great personal loss, such as the loss

 of a child?”
With a gentle tone of compassion, he
answered, “To some degree, that depends on
people’s personal beliefs. If people believe in
rebirth, then accordingly, I think there is some
way to reduce sorrow or worry. They can take
consolation in the fact that their loved one will be
reborn.
“For those people who do not believe in
rebirth, then I think there are still some simple
ways to help deal with the loss. First, they could
reflect that if they worried too much, allowing
themselves to be too overwhelmed by the sense
of loss and sorrow, and if they carried on with
that feeling of being overwhelmed, not only
would it be very destructive and harmful to
themselves, ruining their health, but also it would
not have any benefit to the person who has

 passed away.
“For example, in my own case, I have lost my
most respected tutor, my mother, and also one of
my brothers. When they passed away, of course,
I felt very, very sad. Then I constantly kept
thinking that it’s no use to worry too much, and if
I really loved these people, then I must fulfill their
wishes with a calm mind. So I try my best to do
that. So I think if you’ve lost someone who is
very dear to you, that’s the proper way to
approach it. You see, the best way to keep a
memory of that person, the best remembrance, is
to see if you can carry on the wishes of that
person.
“Initially, of course, feelings of grief and
anxiety are a natural human response to a loss.
But if you allow these feelings of loss and worry
to persist, there’s a danger; if these feelings are

 left unchecked, they can lead to a kind of selfabsorption. A situation where the focus becomes
your own self. And when that happens you
become overwhelmed by the sense of loss, and
you get a feeling that it’s only you who is going
through this. Depression sets in. But in reality,
there are others who will be going through the
same kind of experience. So, if you find yourself
worrying too much, it may help to think of the
other people who have similar or even worse
tragedies. Once you realize that, then you no
longer feel isolated, as if you have been singlepointedly picked out. That can offer you some
kind of condolence.”

 Although pain and suffering are experienced by
all human beings, I have often felt that those
brought up in some Eastern cultures appear to
have a greater acceptance and tolerance for
suffering. Part of this may be due to their beliefs,
but perhaps it is because suffering is more visible
in poorer nations such as India than it is in
wealthier countries. Hunger, poverty, illness, and
death are in plain view. When a person becomes
old or sick, they aren’t marginalized, shipped off
to nursing homes to be cared for by health
professionals—they remain in the community, to
be cared for by the family. Those living in daily
contact with the realities of life cannot easily deny
that life is characterized by suffering, that it is a
natural part of existence.
As Western society gained the ability to limit
the suffering caused by harsh living conditions, it

 seems to have lost the ability to cope with the
suffering that remains. Studies by social scientists
have emphasized that most people in modern
Western society tend to go through life believing
that the world is basically a nice place in which to
live, that life is mostly fair, and that they are good
people who deserve to have good things happen
to them. These beliefs can play an important role
in leading a happier and healthier life. But the
inevitable arising of suffering undermines these
beliefs and can make it difficult to go on living
happily and effectively. In this context, a relatively
minor trauma can have a massive psychological
impact as one loses faith in one’s basic beliefs
about the world as fair and benevolent. As a
result, suffering is intensified.
There’s no doubt that with growing
technology, the general level of physical comfort

 has improved for many in Western society. It is
at this point that a critical shift in perception takes
place; as suffering becomes less visible, it is no
longer seen as part of the fundamental nature of
human beings—but rather as an anomaly, a sign
that something has gone terribly wrong, a sign of
“failure” of some system, an infringement on our
guaranteed right to happiness!
This kind of thinking poses hidden dangers. If
we think of suffering as something unnatural,
something that we shouldn’t be experiencing,
then it’s not much of a leap to begin to look for
someone to blame for our suffering. If I’m
unhappy, then I must be the “victim” of someone
or something—an idea that’s all to common in
the West. The victimizer may be the government,
the educational system, abusive parents, a
“dysfunctional family,” the other gender, or our

 uncaring mate. Or we may turn blame inward:
there’s something wrong with me, I’m the victim
of disease, of defective genes perhaps. But the
risk of continuing to focus on assigning blame and
maintaining a victim stance, is the perpetuation of
our suffering—with persistent feelings of anger,
frustration, and resentment.
Of course, the wish to get free of suffering is
the legitimate goal of every human being. It is the
corollary of our wish to be happy. Thus it is
entirely appropriate that we seek out the causes
of our unhappiness and do whatever we can to
alleviate our problems, searching for solutions on
all levels—global, societal, familial, and
individual. But as long as we view suffering as an
unnatural state, an abnormal condition that we
fear, avoid, and reject, we will never uproot the
causes of suffering and begin to live a happier life.

 Chapter 9

SELF-CREATED SUFFERING

On his initial visit, the well-groomed middle-aged
gentleman, elegantly dressed in an austere black
Armani suit, sat down in a polite yet reserved
manner and began to relate what had brought him

 into the office. He spoke rather softly, in a
controlled, measured voice. I ran through the list
of standard questions: presenting complaint, age,
background, marital status, ....
“That bitch!” he cried suddenly, his voice
seething with rage. “My damn wife! EX-wife,
now. She was having an affair behind my back!
And after everything I did for her. That little ...
that little ... SLUT!” His voice became louder,
more angry, and more venomous, as for the next
twenty minutes he recounted grievance after
grievance against his ex-wife.
Our time was coming to a close. Realizing that
he was just getting warmed up and could easily
continue in this vein for hours, I redirected him.
“Well, most people have difficulty adjusting to a
recent divorce, and that is certainly something
that we can address in future sessions,” I said

 soothingly. “By the way, how long have you been
divorced?”
“Seventeen years, last May.”

In the last chapter we discussed the importance
of accepting suffering as a natural fact of human
existence. While some kinds of suffering are
inevitable, other kinds are self-created. We
explored, for instance, how the refusal to accept
suffering as a natural part of life can lead to
viewing oneself as a perpetual victim and blaming
others for our problems—a surefire recipe for a
miserable life.
But we also add to our own suffering in other
ways. All too often we perpetuate our pain, keep

 it alive, by replaying our hurts over and over
again in our minds, magnifying our injustices in the
process. We repeat our painful memories with
the unconscious wish perhaps that somehow it
will change the situation—but it never does. Of
course, sometimes this endless recounting of our
woes can serve a limited purpose; it can add
drama and a certain excitement to our lives or
elicit attention and sympathy from others. But this
seems like a poor trade-off for the unhappiness
we continue to endure.
In speaking about how we add to our own
suffering, the Dalai Lama explained, “We can see
that there are many ways in which we actively
contribute to our own experience of mental
unrest and suffering. Although, in general, mental
and emotional afflictions themselves can come
naturally, often it is our own reinforcement of

 those negative emotions that makes them so
much worse. For instance when we have anger
or hatred towards a person, there is less
likelihood of its developing to a very intense
degree if we leave it unattended. However, if we
think about the projected injustices done to us,
the ways in which we have been unfairly treated,
and we keep on thinking about them over and
over, then that feeds the hatred. It makes the
hatred very powerful and intense. Of course, the
same can apply to when we have an attachment
towards a particular person; we can feed that by
thinking about how beautiful he or she is, and as
we keep thinking about the projected qualities
that we see in the person, the attachment
becomes more and more intense. But this shows
how through constant familiarity and thinking, we
ourselves can make our emotions more intense

 and powerful.
“We also often add to our pain and suffering
by being overly sensitive, overreacting to minor
things, and sometimes taking things too
personally. We tend to take small things too
seriously and blow them up out of proportion,
while at the same time we often remain indifferent
to the really important things, those things which
have profound effects on our lives and long-term
consequences and implications.
“So I think that to a large extent, whether you
suffer depends on how you respond to a given
situation. For example, say that you find out that
someone is speaking badly of you behind your
back. If you react to this knowledge that
someone is speaking badly of you, this negativity,
with a feeling of hurt or anger, then you yourself
destroy your own peace of mind. Your pain is

 your own personal creation. On the other hand, if
you refrain from reacting in a negative way, let
the slander pass by you as if it were a silent wind
passing behind your ears, you protect yourself
from that feeling of hurt, that feeling of agony. So,
although you may not always be able to avoid
difficult situations, you can modify the extent to
which you suffer by how you choose to respond
to the situation.”

We also often add to our pain and suffering
by being overly sensitive, overreacting to
minor things, and sometimes taking things too
personally ...“ With these words, the Dalai
Lama recognizes the origin of many of the day-

 to-day aggravations that can add up to be a
major source of suffering. Therapists sometimes
call this process personalizing our pain—the
tendency to narrow our psychological field of
vision by interpreting or misinterpreting everything
that occurs in terms of its impact on us.
One night I had dinner with a colleague at a
restaurant. The service at the restaurant turned
out to be very slow, and from the time we sat
down, my colleague began to complain: “Look at
that! That waiter is so damn slow! Where is he? I
think he’s purposely ignoring us!”
Although neither of us had pressing
engagements, my colleague’s complaints about
the slow service continued to escalate throughout
the meal and expanded into a litany of complaints
about the food, tableware, and anything else that
was not to his liking. At the end of the meal, the

 waiter presented us with two free desserts,
explaining, “I apologize for the slow service this
evening,” he said sincerely, “but we’re a little
understaffed. One of the cooks had a death in the
family and is off tonight, and one of the servers
called in sick at the last minute. I hope it didn’t
inconvenience you ...”
“I’m still never coming here again,” my
colleague muttered bitterly under his breath as the
waiter walked off.
This is only a minor illustration of how we
contribute to our own suffering by personalizing
every annoying situation, as if it were being
intentionally perpetrated on us. In this case, the
net result was only a ruined meal, an hour of
aggravation. But when this kind of thinking
becomes a pervasive pattern of relating to the
world and extends to every comment made by

 our family or friends, or even events in society at
large, it can become a significant source of our
misery.
In describing the wider implications of this
kind of narrow thinking, Jacques Lusseyran once
made an insightful observation. Lusseyran, blind
from the age of eight, was a founder of a
resistance group in World War II. Eventually, he
was captured by the Germans and imprisoned in
Buchenwald concentration camp. In later
recounting his experiences in the camps,
Lusseyran stated, “ ... Unhappiness, I saw then,
comes to each of us because we think ourselves
at the center of the world, because we have the
miserable conviction that we alone suffer to the
point of unbearable intensity. Unhappiness is
always to feel oneself imprisoned in one’s own
skin, in one’s own brain.”

 “BUT IT’S NOT FAIR!”

In our daily life, problems invariably arise. But
problems themselves do not automatically cause
suffering. If we can directly address our problem
and focus our energies on finding a solution, for
instance, the problem can be transformed into a
challenge. If we throw into the mix, however, a
feeling that our problem is “unfair,” we add an
additional ingredient that can become a powerful
fuel in creating mental unrest and emotional
suffering. And now we not only have two
problems instead of one, but that feeling of
“unfairness” distracts us, consumes us, and robs
us of the energy needed to solve the original
problem.

 Raising this issue with the Dalai Lama one
morning, I asked, “How can we deal with the
feeling of unfairness that so often seems to torture
us when problems arise?”
The Dalai Lama replied, “There may be a
variety of ways that one might deal with the
feeling that one’s suffering is unfair. I’ve already
spoken of the importance of accepting suffering
as a natural fact of human existence. And I think
that in some ways Tibetans might be in a better
position to accept the reality of these difficult
situations, because they will say, ‘Maybe it is
because of my Karma in the past.’ They will
attribute it to negative actions committed in either
this or a previous life, and so there is a greater
degree of acceptance. I have seen some families
in our settlements in India, with very difficult
situations—living under very poor conditions, and

 on top of that having children with both eyes
blind or sometimes retarded. And somehow
these poor ladies still manage to look after them,
simply saying, ‘This is due to their Karma; it is
their fate.’
“In mentioning Karma, here I think that it is
important to point out and understand that
sometimes due to one’s misunderstanding of the
doctrine of Karma, there is a tendency to blame
everything on Karma and try to exonerate oneself
from the responsibility or from the need to take
personal initiative. One could quite easily say,
‘This is due to my past Karma, my negative past
Karma, and what can I do? I am helpless.’ This
is a totally wrong understanding of Karma,
because although one’s experiences are a
consequence of one’s past deeds, that does not
mean that the individual has no choice or that

 there is no room for initiative to change, to bring
about positive change. And this is the same in all
areas of life. One should not become passive and
try to excuse oneself from having to take
personal initiative on the grounds that everything
is a result of Karma, because if one understands
the concept of Karma properly, one will
understand that Karma means ‘action.’ Karma is
a very active process. And when we talk of
Karma, or action, it is the very action committed
by an agent, in this case, ourselves, in the past.
So what type of future will come about, to a large
extent, lies within our own hands in the present. It
will be determined by the kind of initiatives that
we take now.
“So, Karma should not be understood in
terms of a passive, static kind of force but rather
should be understood in terms of an active

 process. This indicates that there is an important
role for the individual agent to play in determining
the course of the Karmic process. For instance,
even a simple act or a simple purpose, like
fulfilling our needs for food ... In order to achieve
that simple goal, we need an action on the part of
ourselves. We need to look for food, and then
we need to eat it; this shows that even for the
simplest act, even a simple goal is achieved
through action ...”
“Well, reducing the feeling of unfairness by
accepting that it is a result of one’s Karma may
be effective for Buddhists,” I interjected. “But
what about those who don’t believe in the
doctrine of Karma? Many in the West for
instance ...”
“People who believe in the idea of a Creator,
of God, may accept these difficult circumstances

 more easily by viewing them as part of God’s
creation or plan. They may feel that even though
the situation appears to be very negative, God is
all powerful and very merciful, so there may be
some meaning, some significance, behind the
situation that they may not be aware of. I think
that kind of faith can sustain and help them during
their times of suffering.”
“And what about those who don’t believe in
either the doctrine of Karma or the idea of a
Creator God?”
“For a nonbeliever ... ,” the Dalai Lama
pondered for several moments before
responding, “ ... perhaps a practical, scientific
approach could help. I think that scientists usually
consider it very important to look at a problem
objectively, to study it without much emotional
involvement. With this kind of approach, you can

 look at the problem with the attitude ‘If there’s a
way to fight the problem, then fight, even if you
have to go to court!’” He laughed. “Then, if you
find that there’s no way to win, you can simply
forget about it.
“An objective analysis of difficult or
problematic situations can be quite important,
because with this approach you’ll often discover
that behind the scenes there may be other factors
at play. For instance, if you feel that you’re being
treated unfairly by your boss at work, there may
be other factors at play; he may be annoyed by
something else, an argument with his wife that
morning or something, and his behavior may have
nothing to do with you personally, may not be
specifically directed at you. Of course, you must
still face whatever the situation may be, but at
least with this approach you may not have the

 additional anxiety that would come along with it.”
“Could this kind of ‘scientific’ approach, in
which one objectively analyzes a situation, also
possibly help one to discover ways in which
oneself may be contributing to the problem? And
could that help reduce the feeling of unfairness
associated with the difficult situation?”
“Yes!” he responded enthusiastically. “That
would definitely make a difference. In general, if
we carefully examine any given situation in a very
unbiased and honest way, we will realize that to a
large extent we are also responsible for the
unfolding of events.
“For instance, many people blamed the Gulf
War on Saddam Hussein. Afterwards, on various
occasions I expressed, ‘That’s not fair!’ Under
such circumstances, I really feel kind of sorry for
Saddam Hussein. Of course, he is a dictator, and

 of course, there are many other bad things about
him. If you look at the situation roughly, it’s easy
to place all the blame on him—he’s a dictator,
totalitarian, and even his eyes look a little bit
frightening!” he laughed. “But without his army his
capacity to harm is limited, and without military
equipment that powerful army cannot function.
All this military equipment is not produced by
itself from thin air! So, when we look at it like
that, many nations are involved.
“So,” the Dalai Lama continued, “often our
normal tendency is to try to blame our problems
on others, on external factors. Furthermore, we
tend to look for one single cause, and then try to
exonerate ourselves from the responsibility. It
seems that whenever there are intense emotions
involved, there tends to be a disparity between
how things appear and how they really are. In

 this case if you go further and analyze the
situation very carefully, you’ll see that Saddam
Hussein is part of the source of the problem, one
of the factors, but there are other contributing
conditions as well. Once you realize this, your
earlier attitude that he is the only cause
automatically falls away and the reality of the
situation emerges.
“This practice involves looking at things in a
holistic way—realizing that there are many events
contributing to a situation. For example, our
problem with the Chinese—again, there is much
contribution made by ourselves. I think perhaps
our generation may have contributed to the
situation, but definitely our previous generations I
think were very negligent, at least a few
generations back. So I think we, as Tibetans,
contributed to this tragic situation. It’s not fair to

 blame everything on China. But there are so
many levels. Of course, although we might be a
contributing factor to a situation, that doesn’t
mean we are solely to blame. For example,
Tibetans have never completely bowed down to
Chinese oppression; there has been continued
resistance. Because of this the Chinese
developed a new policy—transferring large
masses of Chinese to Tibet so that the Tibetan
population becomes insignificant, the Tibetans
displaced, and the movement for freedom cannot
be effective. In this case we cannot say that the
Tibetan resistance is to blame or is responsible
for the Chinese policy.”
“When you are looking for your own
contribution to a situation, what about those
situations that clearly aren’t your own fault, that
you have nothing to do with, even relatively

 insignificant everyday situations, such as when
someone intentionally lies to you?” I asked.
“Of course, I may initially feel a sense of
disappointment when somebody isn’t truthful, but
even here, if I examine the situation, I might
discover that in fact their motive for hiding
something from me may not be the result of a bad
motive. It may be that they simply have a certain
lack of confidence in me. So sometimes when I
feel disappointed by these kinds of incidents, I try
to look at them from another angle; I’ll think that
maybe the person did not want to fully confide in
me because I won’t be able to keep it secret. My
nature usually tends to be quite straightforward,
so, because of this, the person might have
decided that I’m not the right person who can
keep the secrets, that I may not be able to keep
secrets as many people would expect. In other

 words, I am not worthy of the person’s full trust
because of my personal nature. So, looking at it
in that way, I would consider the cause to be due
to my own fault.”

Even coming from the Dalai Lama, this
rationale seemed like a bit of a stretch—finding
“your own contribution” to another’s dishonesty.
But there was a genuine sincerity in his voice as
he spoke, which suggested that in fact this was a
technique he had used to practical advantage in
his personal life to help deal with adversity. In
applying this technique to our own lives, of
course, we might not always be so successful in
finding our own contribution to a problematic
situation. But whether we are successful or not,
even the honest attempt to search for our own

 contribution to a problem allows a certain shift of
focus that helps to break through the narrow
patterns of thinking that lead to the destructive
feeling of unfairness that is the source of so much
discontent in ourselves and in the world.

 GUILT

As products of an imperfect world, all of us are
imperfect. Every one of us has done some
wrong. There are things we regret—things we
have done or things we should have done.
Acknowledging our wrongdoings with a genuine
sense of remorse can serve to keep us on the
right track in life and encourage us to rectify our
mistakes when possible and take action to
correct things in the future. But if we allow our
regret to degenerate into excessive guilt, holding
on to the memory of our past transgressions with
continued self-blame and self-hatred, this serves
no purpose other than to be a relentless source of
self-punishment and self-induced suffering.

 During an earlier conversation in which we had
briefly discussed the death of his brother, I
recalled that the Dalai Lama had spoken of some
regrets related to his brother’s death. Curious
about how he dealt with feelings of regret, and
possibly guilt feelings, I returned to the subject in
a later conversation, asking, “When we were
talking about Lobsang’s death, you mentioned
some regrets. Have there been other situations in
your life that you’ve regretted?”
“Oh, yes. Now for instance there was one
older monk who lived as a hermit. He used to
come to see me to receive teachings, although I
think he was actually more accomplished than I

 and came to me as a sort of formality. Anyway,
he came to me one day and asked me about
doing a certain high-level esoteric practice. I
remarked in a casual way that this would be a
difficult practice and perhaps would be better
undertaken by someone who was younger, that
traditionally it was a practice that should be
started in one’s midteens. I later found out that
the monk had killed himself in order to be reborn
in a younger body to more effectively undertake
the practice ...”
Surprised by this story, I remarked, “Oh,
that’s terrible! That must have been hard on you
when you heard ...”
The Dalai Lama nodded sadly.
“How did you deal with that feeling of regret?
How did you eventually get rid of it?”
The Dalai Lama silently considered for quite a

 while before replying, “I didn’t get rid of it. It’s
still there.” He stopped again, before adding,
“But even though that feeling of regret is still
there, it isn’t associated with a feeling of
heaviness or a quality of pulling me back. It
would not be helpful to anyone if I let that feeling
of regret weigh me down, be simply a source of
discouragement and depression with no purpose,
or interfere with going on with my life to the best
of my ability.”
At that moment, in a very visceral way, I was
struck once again by the very real possibility of a
human being’s fully facing life’s tragedies and
responding emotionally, even with deep regret,
but without indulging in excessive guilt or selfcontempt. The possibility of a human being’s
wholly accepting herself or himself, complete with
limitations, foibles, and lapses of judgment. The

 possibility of recognizing a bad situation for what
it is and responding emotionally, but without
overresponding. The Dalai Lama sincerely felt
regret over the incident he described but carried
his regret with dignity and grace. And while
carrying this regret, he has not allowed it to weigh
him down, choosing instead to move ahead and
focus on helping others to the best of his ability.
Sometimes I wonder if the ability to live
without indulging in self-destructive guilt is partly
cultural. In recounting my conversation with the
Dalai Lama about regret to a friend who is a
Tibetan scholar, I was told that, in fact, the
Tibetan language doesn’t even have an equivalent
for the English word “guilt,” although it does have
words meaning “remorse” or “repentance” or
“regret,” with a sense of “rectifying things in the
future.” Whatever the cultural component may

 be, however, I believe that by challenging our
customary ways of thinking and by cultivating a
different mental outlook based on the principles
described by the Dalai Lama, any of us can learn
to live without the brand of guilt that does nothing
but cause ourselves needless suffering.

 RESISTING CHANGE

Guilt arises when we convince ourselves that
we’ve made an irreparable mistake. The torture
of guilt is in thinking that any problem is
permanent. Since there is nothing that doesn’t
change, however, so too pain subsides—a
problem doesn’t persist. This is the positive side
of change. The negative side is that we resist
change in nearly every arena of life. The
beginning of being released from suffering is to
investigate one of the primary causes: resistance
to change.
In describing the ever-changing nature of life,
the Dalai Lama explained, “It’s extremely
important to investigate the causes or origins of

 suffering, how it arises. One must begin that
process by appreciating the impermanent,
transient nature of our existence. All things,
events, and phenomena are dynamic, changing
every moment; nothing remains static. Meditating
on one’s blood circulation could serve to
reinforce this idea: the blood is constantly
flowing, moving; it never stands still. This
momentarily changing nature of phenomena is like
a built-in mechanism. And since it is the nature of
all phenomena to change every moment, this
indicates to us that all things lack the ability to
endure, lack the ability to remain the same. And
since all things are subject to change, nothing
exists in a permanent condition, nothing is able to
remain the same under its own independent
power. Thus, all things are under the power or
influence of other factors. So, at any given

 moment, no matter how pleasant or pleasurable
your experience may be, it will not last. This
becomes the basis of a category of suffering
known in Buddhism as the ‘suffering of change.’
”

The concept of impermanence plays a central
role in Buddhist thought, and the contemplation
of impermanence is a key practice.
Contemplation of impermanence serves two main
vital functions within the Buddhist path. On a
conventional level, or in an everyday sense, the
Buddhist practitioner contemplates his or her
own impermanence—the fact that life is tenuous
and we never know when we’ll die. When this

 reflection is combined with a belief in the rarity of
human existence and the possibility of attaining a
state of spiritual Liberation, of release from
suffering and endless rounds of rebirth, then this
contemplation serves to increase the
practitioner’s resolve to use her or his time to
best advantage, by engaging in the spiritual
practices that will bring about this Liberation. On
a deeper level, the contemplation of the more
subtle aspects of impermanence, the
impermanent nature of all phenomena, begins the
practitioner’s quest to understand the true nature
of reality and, through this understanding, dispel
the ignorance that is the ultimate source of our
suffering.
So, while the contemplation of impermanence
has tremendous significance within a Buddhist
context, the question arises: does the

 contemplation
and
understanding
of
impermanence have any practical application in
the everyday lives of non-Buddhists as well? If
we view the concept of “impermanence” from the
standpoint of “change,” then the answer is a
definite yes. After all, whether one looks at life
from a Buddhist perspective or a Western
perspective, the fact remains that life is change.
And to the degree that we refuse to accept this
fact and resist the natural life changes, we will
continue to perpetuate our own suffering.
The acceptance of change can be an
important factor in reducing a large measure of
our self-created suffering. So often, for instance,
we cause our own suffering by refusing to
relinquish the past. If we define our self-image in
terms of what we used to look like or in terms of
what we used to be able to do and can’t do now,

 it is a pretty safe bet that we won’t grow happier
as we grow older. Sometimes, the more we try
to hold on, the more grotesque and distorted life
becomes.
While the acceptance of the inevitability of
change, as a general principle, can help us cope
with many problems, taking a more active role by
specifically learning about normal life changes can
prevent an even greater amount of the day-today anxiety that is the cause of many of our
troubles.
Revealing the value of recognizing normal life
changes, a new mother told me about a visit to
the emergency room she had made at two
o‘clock in the morning.
“What seems to be the problem?” the
pediatrician asked her.
“MY BABY! SOMETHING’S WRONG!”

 she cried frantically, “I think he’s choking or
something! His tongue keeps protruding ; he just
keeps sticking it out ... over and over again ...
like he’s trying to get something out, but there’s
nothing in his mouth ...”
After a few questions and a brief examination,
the doctor assured her, “There’s nothing to
worry about. As a baby grows, he develops an
increasing awareness of his own body and what it
can do. Your baby has just discovered his
tongue.”

Margaret, a thirty-one-year-old journalist,
illustrates the critical importance of understanding
and accepting change in the context of a personal
relationship. She came to me complaining of mild
anxiety which she attributed to difficulty adjusting

 to a recent divorce.
“I thought that it might be a good idea to have
a few sessions just to talk to someone,” she
explained, “to help me really put the past to rest
and make the transition back to the single life. To
be honest, I’m a little nervous about it ...”
I asked her to describe the circumstances of
her divorce.
“I guess I’d have to describe it as amiable.
There were no big fights or anything like that. My
ex and I both have good jobs, so there weren’t
any problems with a financial settlement. We
have one boy, but he seems to have adjusted to
the divorce well, and my ex and I have a joint
custody agreement that is working well ...”
“I mean, can you tell me what led to the
divorce?”
“Umm ... I suppose we just fell out of love,”

 she sighed. “It seemed that gradually the romance
was gone; we just didn’t have the same intimacy
that we had when we were first married. We
both got busy with our jobs and our son and just
seemed to drift apart. We tried some sessions of
marital counseling, but they didn’t do any good.
We still got along, but it was like we were
brother and sister. It didn’t feel like love, like a
real marriage. Anyway, we mutually agreed that it
would be best to get a divorce; something just
wasn’t there anymore.”
After spending two sessions delineating her
problem, we decided on a course of short-term
psychotherapy, focusing specifically on helping
her reduce her anxiety and adjust to her recent
life changes. Overall, she was an intelligent and
emotionally well-adjusted person. She responded
very well to a brief course of therapy and easily

 made the transition back to single life.
Despite obviously caring for each other, it
was clear that Margaret and her husband had
interpreted the change in their level of passion as
a sign that the marriage should end. All too often
we interpret a diminution of passion as a signal
that there is a fatal problem in the relationship.
And more often than not, the first whisper of
change in our relationship may create a sense of
panic, a feeling that something is drastically
wrong. Perhaps we did not pick the right partner
after all. Our mate just doesn’t seem like the
person we fell in love with. Disagreements come
up—we may be in the mood for sex and our
partner is tired, we may want to see a special
movie but our partner has no interest in it or is
always busy. We may discover differences that
we never noticed before. So, we conclude, it

 must be over; after all, there’s no getting around
the fact that we are growing apart. Things just
aren’t the same anymore; maybe we should get
a divorce.
So what do we do? Relationship experts
churn out books by the dozen, cookbooks telling
us exactly what to do when the passion and flame
of romance grow dim. They offer a myriad of
suggestions designed to help rekindle the
romance—restructure your schedule to make
romantic time a priority, plan romantic dinners or
weekend getaways, compliment your mate, learn
how to have a meaningful conversation.
Sometimes these things help. Sometimes they
don’t.
But before pronouncing the relationship dead,
one of the most beneficial things we can do when
we notice a change is to simply stand back,

 assess the situation, and arm ourselves with as
much knowledge as possible about the normal
patterns of change in relationships.
As our lives play out, we develop from
infancy to childhood, to adulthood, to old age.
We accept these changes in individual
development as a natural progression. But a
relationship is also a dynamic living system,
composed of two organisms interacting in a living
environment. And as a living system, it is equally
natural and right that the relationship go through
stages. In any relationship, there are different
dimensions of closeness—physical, emotional,
and intellectual. Bodily contact, sharing emotions,
thoughts, and exchanging ideas are all legitimate
ways of connecting with those we love. It is
normal for the balance to wax and wane:
sometimes physical closeness decreases but

 emotional closeness can increase; at other times
we don’t feel like sharing words but just want to
be held. If we are sensitive to this issue, we can
rejoice in the initial bloom of passion in a
relationship, but if it cools, instead of feeling
worry or anger, we can open ourselves to new
forms of intimacy that can be equally—or
perhaps more—satisfying. We can delight in our
partner as a companion, enjoy a steadier love, a
deeper bond.
In
his
book Intimate Bebavior,
DesmondMorris describes the normal changes
that occur in a human being’s need for closeness.
He suggests that each of us repeatedly goes
through three stages: “Hold me tight,” “Put me
down,” and “Leave me alone.” The cycle first
becomes apparentin the firstyears of life when
children move from the “hold me tight” phase

 characteristic of infancy to the “put me down”
stage when the child first begins to explore the
world, crawl, walk, and achieve some
independence and autonomy from the mother.
This is part of normal development and growth.
These phases do not just move in one direction,
however ; at various stages a child may
experience some anxiety when the feeling of
separateness becomes too great, and then the
child will return to the mother for soothing and
closeness. In adolescence, “leave me alone”
becomes the predominant phase as the child
struggles to form an individual identity. Although
this may be difficult or painful for the parents,
most experts recognize it as a normal and
necessary phase in the transition from childhood
to adulthood. Even within this phase, there is still
a mixture of phases. While the adolescent is

 crying “Leave me alone!” to his parents at home,
the “hold me tight” needs may be met by strong
identification with the peer group.
In adult relationships as well, the same flux
occurs. Levels of intimacy change, with periods
of greater intimacy alternating with periods of
greater distance. This is also part of the normal
cycle of growth and development. To reach our
full potential as human beings, we need to be able
to balance our needs for closeness and union
with times when we must turn inward, with a
sense of autonomy, to grow and develop as
individuals.
As we come to understand this, we will no
longer react with horror or panic when we first
notice ourselves “growing apart” from our
partner, any more than we would panic while
watching the tide go out at the seashore. Of

 course, sometimes a growing emotional distance
can signal serious problems in a relationship (an
unspoken undercurrent of anger for instance),
and even breakups can occur. In those cases,
measures such as therapy can be very helpful.
But the main point to keep in mind is that a
growing distance doesn’t automatically spell
disaster. It can also be part of a cycle that returns
to redefine the relationship in a new form that can
recapture or even surpass the intimacy that
existed in the past.
So, the act of acceptance, of acknowledging
that change is a natural part of our interactions
with others, can play a vital role in our
relationships. We may discover that it is at the
very time when we may feel most disappointed,
as if something has gone out of the relationship,
that a profound transformation can occur. These

 transitional periods can become pivotal points
when true love can begin to mature and flower.
Our relationship may no longer be based on
intense passion, the view of the other as the
embodiment of perfection, or the feeling that we
are merged with the other. But in exchange for
that, we are now in a position to truly begin to
know the other—to see the other as he or she is,
a separate individual, with faults and weaknesses
perhaps, but a human being like ourselves. It is
only at this point that we can make a genuine
commitment, a commitment to the growth of
another human being—an act of true love.
Perhaps Margaret’s marriage could have
been salvaged by accepting the natural change in
the relationship and forming a new relationship
based on factors other than passion and
romance.

 Fortunately, however, the story didn’t end
there. Two years after my last session with
Margaret, I ran into her at a shopping mall (the
situation of running into an ex-patient in a social
setting is one that invariably makes me, like most
therapists, feel a bit awkward).
“How have you been?” I asked.
“Things couldn’t be better!” she exclaimed.
“Last month, my ex-husband and I remarried.”
“Really?”
“Yeah, and it’s going great. We continued to
see each other, of course, because of the joint
custody. Anyway, it was difficult at first ... but
after the divorce, somehow the pressure was off.
We didn’t have any expectations .anymore. And
we found out that we really did like each other
and love each other. Things still aren’t the same
as when we were first married, but it doesn’t

 seem to matter; we’re really happy together. It
just feels right.”

 Chapter 10

SHIFTING PERSPECTIVE

Once there was a disciple of a Greek
philosopher who was commanded by his
Master for three years to give money to

 everyone who insulted him. When this
period of trial was over the Master said to
him, “Now you can go to Athens and learn
Wisdom.” When the disciple was entering
Athens, he met a certain wise man who sat
at the gate insulting everybody who came
and went. He also insulted the disciple,
who burst out laughing. “Why do you
laugh when I insult you?” said the wise
man. “Because,” said the disciple, “for
three years I have been paying for this
kind of thing and now you give it to me for
nothing.” “Enter the city,” said the wise
man, “it is all yours ...”
The fourth-century Desert Fathers, an assortment
of eccentric characters who retired to the deserts
around Scete for a life of sacrifice and prayer,

 taught this story to illustrate the value of suffering
and hardship. It wasn’t hardship alone, however,
that opened the “city of wisdom” to the disciple.
The prime factor that allowed him to deal so
effectively with a difficult situation was his
capacity to shift perspective, to view his
situation from a different vantage point.
The ability to shift perspective can be one of
the most powerful and effective tools we have to
help us cope with life’s daily problems. The Dalai
Lama explained:
“The ability to look at events from different
perspectives can be very helpful. Then, practicing
this, one can use certain experiences, certain
tragedies to develop a calmness of mind. One
must realize that every phenomena, every event,
has different aspects. Everything is of a relative
nature. For example, in my own case, I lost my

 country. From that viewpoint, it is very tragic—
and there are even worse things. There’s a lot of
destruction happening in our country. That’s a
very negative thing. But if I look at the same
event from another angle, I realize that as a
refugee, I have another perspective. As a refugee
there is no need for formalities, ceremony,
protocol. If everything were status quo, if things
were okay, then on a lot of occasions you merely
go through the motions; you pretend. But when
you are passing through desperate situations,
there’s no time to pretend. So from that angle,
this tragic experience has been very useful to me.
Also, being a refugee creates a lot of new
opportunities for meeting with many people.
People from different religious traditions, from
different walks of life, those who I may not have
met had I remained in my country. So in that

 sense it’s been very, very useful.
“It seems that often when problems arise, our
outlook becomes narrow. All of our attention
may be focused on worrying about the problem,
and we may have a sense that we’re the only one
that is going through such difficulties. This can
lead to a kind of self-absorption that can make
the problem seem very intense. When this
happens, I think that seeing things from a wider
perspective can definitely help—realizing, for
instance, that there are many other people who
have gone through similar experiences, and even
worse experiences. This practice of shifting
perspective can even be helpful in certain
illnesses or when in pain. At the time the pain
arises it is of course often very difficult, at that
moment, to do formal meditation practices to
calm the mind. But if you can make comparisons,

 view your situation from a different perspective,
somehow something happens. If you only look at
that one event, then it appears bigger and bigger.
If you focus too closely, too intensely, on a
problem when it occurs, it appears
uncontrollable. But if you compare that event
with some other greater event, look at the same
problem from a distance, then it appears smaller
and less overwhelming.”

Shortly before one session with the Dalai Lama, I
happened to run into an administrator of a facility
where I used to work. During my tenure at his
facility we had a number of run-ins because I
believed that he was compromising patient care

 in favor of financial considerations. I hadn’t seen
him in quite a while, but as soon as I spotted him,
all of our arguments came flooding back and I
could feel the anger and hatred welling up inside
me. By the time I was ushered into the Dalai
Lama’s hotel suite for our session later that day, I
was considerably calmer, but still feeling a bit
unsettled.
“Let’s say that someone makes you angry,” I
began. “Your natural response to being hurt, your
immediate response, is to get angry. But in a lot
of cases, it’s not just a matter of getting angry at
the time you’re being hurt. You might think about
the event later, even much later, and every time
you think about it you become angry all over
again. How would you suggest dealing with that
kind of situation?”
The Dalai Lama nodded thoughtfully, and

 looked at me. I wondered if he sensed that I
wasn’t bringing up the topic for purely academic
reasons.
“If you look from a different angle,” he said,
“then surely the person who caused this anger in
you will have a lot of other positive aspects,
positive qualities. If you look carefully, you will
also find that the act which has made you angry
has also given you certain opportunities,
something which otherwise would not have been
possible, even from your point of view. So with
effort you’ll be able to see many different angles
to a single event. This will help.”
“But what about if you look for the positive
angles of a person or event and can’t find any?”
“Here, I think, we would be dealing with a
situation where you might need to make some
effort. Spend some time seriously searching for a

 different perspective on the situation. Not just in
a superficial way. But in a very pointed and direct
way. You need to use all your powers of
reasoning and look at the situation as objectively
as possible. For instance, you might reflect on the
fact that when you are really angry at someone
you tend to perceive them as having 100 percent
negative qualities. Just as when you are strongly
attracted to someone the tendency is to see them
as having 100 percent positive qualities. But this
perception does not correspond with reality. If
your friend, who you view as so wonderful, were
to purposely harm you in some way, suddenly
you would become acutely aware that they aren’t
composed of 100 percent good qualities.
Similarly, if your enemy, the one you hate, were
to sincerely beg your forgiveness and continue to
show you kindness, it’s unlikely that you would

 continue to perceive them as 100 percent bad.
So, even though when you are angry at someone
you might feel that the person has no positive
qualities, the reality is that nobody is 100 percent
bad. They must have some good qualities if you
search hard enough. So, the tendency to see
someone as completely negative is due to your
own perception based on your own mental
projection, rather than the true nature of that
individual.
“In the same way, a situation that you initially
perceive as 100 percent negative may have some
positive aspects to it. But I think that even if you
have discovered a positive angle to a bad
situation, that alone is often not enough. You still
need to reinforce that idea. So you may need to
remind yourself of that positive angle many times,
until gradually your feeling changes. Generally

 speaking, once you’re already in a difficult
situation, it isn’t possible to change your
attitude simply by adopting a particular
thought once or twice. Rather it’s through a
process of learning, training, and getting used
to new viewpoints that enables you to deal
with the difficulty.”
The Dalai Lama reflected for a moment, and,
adhering to his usual pragmatic stance, he added,
“If, however, in spite of your efforts, you do not
find any such positive angles or perspectives to a
person’s act, then for the time being the best
course of action may be to simply try to forget
about it.”

 Inspired by the Dalai Lama’s words, later that
evening I tried to discover some “positive angles”
to the administrator, ways in which he was not
“100 percent bad.” It wasn’t hard. I knew him to
be a loving father, for instance, trying to raise his
children the best he could. And I had to admit
that my run-ins with him had ultimately benefited
me—they had been instrumental in my decision
to quit working at that facility, which ultimately
led to more satisfying work. While these
reflections didn’t immediately result in an
overwhelming liking for this man, they
unquestionably took the bite out of my feelings of
hatred with surprisingly little effort. Soon, the
Dalai Lama would offer an even more profound
lesson: how to completely transform one’s
attitude toward one’s enemies and learn to
cherish them.

 A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON THE
ENEMY

The Dalai Lama’s primary method of
transforming our attitude about our enemies
involves a systematic and rational analysis of our
customary response to those who harm us. He
explained:
“Let’s begin by examining our characteristic
attitude toward our rivals. Generally speaking, of
course, we do not wish good things for our
enemies. But even if your enemy is made
unhappy through your actions, what is there for
you to be so joyful about? If you think about it
carefully, how can there be anything more

 wretched than that? Carrying around the burden
of such feelings of hostility and ill will. And do
you really want to be that mean?
“If we take revenge upon one’s enemy, then it
creates a kind of vicious cycle. If you retaliate,
the other person is not going to accept that—he
or she is going to retaliate against you, and then
you will do the same, so it will go on. And
especially when this happens at the community
level, it can go on from generation to generation.
The result is that both sides suffer. Then, the
whole purpose of life becomes spoiled. You can
see this in the refugee camps, where hatred is
cultivated towards another group. This happens
from childhood on. It is very sad. So, anger or
hatred is like a fisherman’s hook. It’s very
important for us to ensure that we are not caught
by this hook.

 “Now, some people consider that strong
hatred is good for national interest. I think this is
very negative. It is very short-sighted.
Counteracting this way of thinking is the basis of
the spirit of nonviolence and understanding.”
Having challenged our characteristic attitude
toward one’s enemy, the Dalai Lama went on to
offer an alternative way of viewing one’s enemy,
a new perspective that could have a revolutionary
impact on one’s life. He explained:
“In Buddhism in general, a lot of attention is
paid to our attitudes towards our rivals or
enemies. This is because hatred can be the
greatest stumbling block to the development of
compassion and happiness. If you can learn to
develop patience and tolerance towards your
enemies, then everything else becomes much
easier—your compassion towards all others

 begins to flow naturally.
“So, for a spiritual practitioner, one’s enemies
play a crucial role. As I see it, compassion is the
essence of a spiritual life. And in order for you to
become fully successful in practicing love and
compassion, the practice of patience and
tolerance is indispensable. There is no fortitude
similar to patience, just as there is no affliction
worse than hatred. Therefore, one must exert
one’s best efforts not to harbor hatred towards
the enemy, but rather use the encounter as an
opportunity to enhance one’s practice of patience
and tolerance.
“In fact, the enemy is the necessary
condition for practicing patience. Without an
enemy’s action, there is no possibility for
patience or tolerance to arise. Our friends do not
ordinarily test us and provide the opportunity to

 cultivate patience; only our enemies do this. So,
from this standpoint we can consider our enemy
as a great teacher, and revere them for giving us
this precious opportunity to practice patience.
“Now there are many, many people in the
world, but relatively few with whom we interact,
and even fewer who cause us problems. So
when you come across such a chance for
practicing patience and tolerance, you should
treat it with gratitude. It is rare. Just as having
unexpectedly found a treasure in your own
house, you should be happy and grateful towards
your enemy for providing that precious
opportunity. Because if you are ever to be
successful in your practice of patience and
tolerance, which are critical factors in
counteracting negative emotions, it is due to the
combination of your own efforts and also the

 opportunity provided by your enemy.
“Of course, one might still feel, ‘Why should I
venerate my enemy, or acknowledge his or her
contribution, because the enemy had no intention
to give me this precious opportunity for practicing
patience, no intention of helping me? And not
only do they have no wish or intention to help
me, but they have a deliberate malicious intention
to harm me! Therefore, it’s appropriate to hate
them—they are definitely not worthy of respect.’
Actually, it is in fact the presence of this hateful
state of mind in the enemy, the intention to hurt
us, that makes the enemy’s action unique.
Otherwise, if it is just the actual act of hurting us,
then we would hate doctors and consider them
as enemies because sometimes they adopt
methods that can be painful, such as surgery. But
still, we do not consider these acts as harmful or

 the acts of an enemy because the intention on the
part of the doctor was to help us. So, therefore,
it is exactly this willful intention to harm us that
makes the enemy unique and gives us this
precious opportunity to practice patience.”

The Dalai Lama’s suggestion to venerate one’s
enemies because of the opportunities for growth
they provide might be a bit hard to swallow at
first. But the situation is analogous to a person
seeking to tone and strengthen one’s body
through weight training. Of course, the activity of
lifting is uncomfortable at first—the weights are
heavy. One strains, sweats, struggles. Yet it is the
very act of struggling against the resistance that

 ultimately results in our strength. One appreciates
good weight equipment not for any immediate
pleasure it provides, but for the ultimate benefit
one receives.
Perhaps even the Dalai Lama’s claims about
the “rarity” and “preciousness” of The Enemy are
more than just fanciful ratio nalizations. As I listen
to my patients describe their difficulties with
others, this becomes quite clear—when it comes
down to it, most people don’t have legions of
enemies and antagonists they’re struggling with,
at least on a personal level. Usually the conflict is
just confined to a few people. A boss perhaps,
or a coworker, an ex-spouse, a sibling. From
that standpoint, The Enemy is truly “rare”—our
supply is limited. And it’s the struggle, the
process of resolving the conflict with The Enemy
—through learning, examining, finding alternative

 ways of dealing with them—that ultimately results
in true growth, insight, and a successful
psychotherapeutic outcome.
Imagine what it would be like if we went
through life never encountering an enemy or any
other obstacles for that matter, if from the cradle
to the grave everyone we met pampered us, held
us, hand-fed us (soft bland food, easy to digest),
amused us with funny faces and the occasional
“goo-goo” noise. If from infancy we were carried
around in a basket (later on, perhaps on a litter),
never encountering any challenge, never tested—
in short, if everyone continued to treat us like a
baby. That might sound good at first. For the first
few months of life it might be appropriate. But if it
persisted it could only result in one becoming a
sort of gelatinous mass, a monstrosity really—
with the mental and emotional development of

 veal. It’s the very struggle of life that makes us
who we are. And it is our enemies that test us,
provide us with the resistance necessary for
growth.

 IS THIS ATTITUDE PRACTICAL?

The practice of approaching our problems
rationally and learning to view our troubles or our
enemies from alternative perspectives certainly
seemed like a worthwhile pursuit, but I wondered
to what degree this could really bring about a
fundamental transformation of attitude. I
remembered once reading in an interview that
one of the Dalai Lama’s daily spiritual practices
was the recitation of a prayer, The Eight Verses
on the Training of the Mind, written in the
eleventh century by the Tibetan saint, Langri
Thangpa. It reads, in part:
Whenever I associate with someone,

 may I think myself the lowest among all
and hold the other supreme in the depth
of my heart! ...
When Isee beings of wicked nature,
pressed by violent sin and affliction, may
I hold these rare ones dear as if I had
found a precious treasure! ...
When others, out of envy, treat me
badly with abuse, slander and the like,
may I suffer the defeat and offer the
victory to others! ...
When the one, whom I have benefited
with great hope, burts me very badly,
may I behold him as my supreme Guru!
In short may I, directly and indirectly,
offer benefit and happiness to all
beings;may I secretly take upon myself
the barm and suffering of all beings! ...

 After I read about this, I asked the Dalai Lama,
“I know that you’ve contemplated this prayer a
great deal, but do you really think it is applicable
these days? I mean, it was written by a monk
living in a monastery—a setting where the worst
thing that might happen is someone gossiping
about you or telling lies about you or perhaps the
occasional punch or slap. In that case it might be
easy to ‘offer the victory’ to them—but in
today’s society the ’hurt’ or bad treatment one
receives from others might include rape, torture,
murder, etc. From that standpoint, the attitude in
the prayer really doesn’t seem applicable.” I felt
a bit smug, having made an observation that I
thought was rather apt, the ol’ bon mot.
The Dalai Lama was silent for several
moments, his brow furrowed deep in thought,

 then said, “There may be something in what you
are saying.” He then went on to discuss instances
where there may need to be some modification to
that attitude, where one may need to take strong
countermeasures to other’s aggression to prevent
harm to oneself or others.
Later that evening I thought over our
conversation. Two points vividly emerged. First,
I was struck by his extraordinary readiness to
take a fresh look at his own beliefs and practices
—in this case, demonstrating a willingness to
reevaluate a cherished prayer that had no doubt
fused with his very being through years of
repetition. The second point was less inspiring. I
was overcome with a sense of my own
arrogance! It occurred to me that I had
suggested to him that the prayer might not be
appropriate because it wasn’t in keeping with the

 harsh realities of today’s world. But it wasn’t until
later that I reflected on who I had been speaking
to—a man who had lost an entire country as a
result of one of the most brutal invasions in
history. A man who has lived in exile for almost
four decades while an entire nation placed their
hopes and dreams of freedom on him. A man
with a deep sense of personal responsibility, who
has listened with compassion to a continuous
stream of refugees pouring out their stories of the
murder, rape, torture, and degradation of the
Tibetan people by the Chinese. More than once
I’ve seen the look of infinite caring and sadness
on his face as he listened to these accounts, often
toldby people who crossed the Himalayas on
foot (a two-year journey) just to catch a glimpse
of him.
And these stories aren’t of physical violence

 only. Often they involved the attempt to destroy
the spirit of the Tibetan people. A Tibetan
refugee once told me about the Chinese “school”
he was required to attend as a youngster growing
up in Tibet. The mornings were devoted to
indoctrination and study of Chairman Mao’s
“little red book.” The afternoons were devoted to
reporting on various homework assignments. The
“homework” was generally devised to eradicate
the deeply ingrained spirit of Buddhism among
the Tibetan people. For example, knowing about
the Buddhist prohibition against killing and the
belief that every living creature is equally a
precious “sentient being,” one schoolteacher
assigned his students the task of killing something
and bringing it to school the following day. The
students were graded. Each dead animal was
given a certain point value—a fly was worth one

 point, a worm—two, a mouse—five, a cat—ten,
and so on. (When I recounted this story to a
friend recently, he shook his head with a look of
disgust, and mused, “I wonder how many points
the student would get for killin’ the damn
teacher?”)
Through his spiritual practices, such as
recitation of The Eight Verses on the Training
of the Mind, the Dalai Lama has been able to
come to terms with the reality of this situation yet
continue to campaign actively for freedom and
human rights in Tibet for forty years. At the same
time he has maintained an attitude of humility and
compassion toward the Chinese, which has
inspired millions worldwide. And here was I,
suggesting that this prayer might not be relevant
to the “realities” of today’s world. I still flush with
embarrassment whenever I think of that

 conversation.

 DISCOVERING NEW
PERSPECTIVES

In trying to apply the Dalai Lama’s method of
shifting perspective on “the enemy,” I happened
to stumble upon another technique one afternoon.
During the course of preparing for this book I
attended some teachings by the Dalai Lama on
the East Coast. On my return home I took a
nonstop flight back to Phoenix. As usual, I had
booked an aisle seat. Despite having just
attended spiritual teachings, I was in a rather
cranky mood as I boarded the packed plane.
Then I discovered I had been mistakenly
assigned a center seat—sandwiched between a

 man of generous proportions who had the
annoying habit of draping his thick forearm over
my side of the armrest and a middle-aged woman
whom I took an immediate dislike to because, I
decided, she had usurped my aisle seat. There
was something about this woman that really
bothered me—her voice a bit too shrill, her
manner a bit too imperial, I’m not sure. Right
after takeoff she began talking continuously to the
man sitting directly in front of her. The man
turned out to be her husband, and I “gallantly”
offered to exchange seats with him. But they
wouldn’t have it—they both wanted aisle seats. I
grew more annoyed. The prospect of five solid
hours seated next to this woman seemed
unbearable.
Realizing that I was reacting so strongly to a
woman whom I didn’t even know, I decided that

 it must be “transference”—she must
subconsciously remind me of someone from my
childhood—the ol’ unresolved-feelings-of-hatetoward-my-mother or something. I racked my
brain but couldn’t come up with a likely
candidate-she just didn’t remind me of anyone
from my past.
It then occurred to me that this was the
perfect opportunity to practice developing
patience. So, I started in on the technique of
visualizing my enemy in my aisle seat as a
cherished benefactor, placed next to me to teach
me patience and tolerance. I figured this should
be a snap—after all, as “enemies” go you
couldn’t get any milder than this—I had just met
this woman, and she hadn’t actually done
anything to harm me. After about twenty minutes,
I gave it up—she still bugged me! I resigned

 myself to remaining irritable for the rest of the
flight. Sulking, I glared at one of her hands that
was furtively encroaching on my armrest. I hated
everything about this woman. I was staring
absently at her thumbnail when it occurred to me:
Do I hate that thumbnail? Not really. It was just
an ordinary thumbnail. Unremarkable. Next, I
glanced at her eye and asked myself: Do I really
hate that eye? Yes, I did. (Of course, for no
good reason—which is the purest form of hate). I
focused in closer. Do I hate that pupil? No. Do I
hate that cornea, that iris, or that sclera? No. So,
do I really hate that eye? I had to admit that I
didn’t. I felt that I was on to something. I moved
on to a knuckle, a finger, a jaw, an elbow. With
some surprise I realized that there were parts of
this woman that I didn’t hate. Focusing on
details,
on particulars,
instead
of

 overgeneralizations, allowed a subtle internal
change, a softening. This shift of perspective tore
an opening in my prejudice, just wide enough to
look at her as simply another human being. As I
was feeling this, she suddenly turned to me and
started a conversation. I don’t remember what
we talked about—it was small talk mostly—but
by the end of the flight my anger and annoyance
had been diffused. Granted, she wasn’t my New
Best Friend but also she was no longer The Evil
Usurper of My Aisle Seat—just another human
being, like me, moving through life as best she
could.

 A SUPPLY MIND

The ability to shift perspective, the capacity to
view one’s problems “from different angles,” is
nurtured by a supple quality of mind. The
ultimate benefit of a supple mind is that it allows
us to embrace all of life—to be fully alive and
human. Following a long day of public talks in
Tucson one afternoon, the Dalai Lama walked
back to his hotel suite. As he slowly walked back
to his room, a bank of magenta rain clouds
spanned the sky, absorbing the late afternoon
light and sending the Catalina Mountains into
deep relief, the entire landscape a vast palette of
purple hues. The effect was spectacular. The
warm air, laden with the fragrance of desert

 plants, of sage, a dampness, a restless breeze,
holding the promise of an unbridled Sonoran
storm. The Dalai Lama stopped. For several
moments he quietly surveyed the horizon, taking
in the entire panorama, finally commenting on the
beauty of the setting. He walked on, but after a
few steps he paused again, bending down to
examine a tiny lavender bud on a small plant. He
touched it gently, noting its delicate form, and
wondered aloud about the name of the plant. I
was struck by the facility with which his mind
functioned. His awareness seemed to move so
easily from taking in the complete landscape to
focusing on a single bud, a simultaneous
appreciation of the totality of the environment as
well as the smallest detail. A capacity to
encompass all facets and the full spectrum of life.
Every one of us can develop this same

 suppleness of mind. It comes about, at least in
part, directly through our efforts to stretch our
perspective and deliberately try on new
viewpoints. The end result is a simultaneous
awareness of the big picture as well as our
individual circumstances. This dual outlook, a
concurrent view of the “Big World” and our own
“Little World,” can act as a kind of triage, helping
us separate what is important in life from what
isn’t.

In my own case, it took a bit of gentle prodding
by the Dalai Lama, during the course of our

 conversations, before I began to break out of my
own limited perspective. By nature and training,
I’ve always tended to address problems from the
standpoint of individual dynamics—psychological
processes occurring purely within the domain of
the mind. Sociological or political perspectives
have never held much interest for me. In one
discussion with the Dalai Lama I started
questioning him about the importance of
achieving a wider perspective. Having had
several cups of coffee earlier, my conversation
started to become quite animated and I began to
speak about the ability to shift perspective as an
internal process, a solitary pursuit, based solely
on an individual’s conscious decision to adopt a
different view.
In the midst of my spirited discourse, the
Dalai Lama finally interrupted to remind me,

 “When you speak of adopting a wider
perspective this includes working cooperatively
with other people. When you have crises which
are global by nature for instance, such as the
environment or problems of modern economic
structure, this calls for a coordinated and
concerted effort among many people, with a
sense of responsibility and commitment. This is
more encompassing than an individual or
personal issue.”
I was annoyed that he was dragging in the
subject of the world while I was trying to
concentrate on the subject of the individual (and
this attitude, I’m embarrassed to admit, on the
very topic of widening one’s viewpoint!).
“But this week,” I insisted, “in our
conversations and in your public talks, you’ve
spoken a lot about the importance of effecting

 personal change from within, through internal
transformation. For instance, you’ve spoken
about the importance of developing compassion,
a warm heart, of overcoming anger and hatred,
cultivating patience and tolerance ...”
“Yes. Of course, change must come from
within the individual. But when you are seeking
solutions to global problems, you need to be able
to approach these problems from the standpoint
of the individual as well as from the level of
society at large. So, when you’re talking about
being flexible, about having a wider perspective
and so on, this requires the ability to address
problems from various levels: the individual level,
the community level, and the global level.
“Now, for instance, at the talk at the
university the other evening, I spoke about the
need to reduce anger and hatred through the

 cultivation of patience and tolerance. Minimizing
hatred is like internal disarmament. But, as I also
mentioned in that talk, that internal disarmament
must go with external disarmament. That I think is
very, very important. Fortunately, after the Soviet
empire collapsed, at least for the time being,
there is no more threat of nuclear holocaust. So, I
think this is a very good time, a very good start—
we should not miss this opportunity! Now I think
we must strengthen the genuine force of peace.
Real peace—not just mere absence of violence
or absence of war. Mere absence of war can be
produced by weapons—like the nuclear
deterrent. But a mere absence of war is not
genuine, lasting world peace. Peace must
develop on mutual trust. And since weapons are
the greatest obstacle for development of mutual
trust, I think the time has now come to figure out

 how to get rid of these weapons. That is very
important. Of course, we cannot achieve this
overnight. I think the realistic way is step by step.
But anyway, I think we must make our ultimate
goal very clear: The whole world should be
demilitarized. So, on one level we should be
working toward developing inner peace, but at
the same time it’s very important to work
towards external disarmament and peace as well,
making a small contribution in whatever way we
can. That’s our responsibility.”

 THE IMPORTANCE OF FLEXIBLE
THINKING

There is a reciprocal relationship between a
supple mind and the ability to shift perspective: A
supple, flexible mind helps us address our
problems from a variety of perspectives, and,
conversely, deliberately trying to objectively
examine our problems from a variety of
perspectives can be seen as a kind of flexibility
training for the mind. In today’s world, the
attempt to develop a flexible mode of thinking
isn’t simply a self-indulgent exercise for idle
iritellectuals-it can be a matter of survival. Even
on an evolutionary scale, the species that have

 been most flexible, most adaptable to
environmental changes, have survived and
thrived. Life today is characterized by sudden,
unexpected, and sometimes violent change. A
supple mind can help us reconcile the external
changes going on all around us. It can also help
us integrate all of our internal conflicts,
inconsistencies, and ambivalence. Without
cultivating a pliant mind, our outlook becomes
brittle and our relationship to the world becomes
characterized by fear. But by adopting a flexible,
malleable approach to life, we can maintain our
composure even in the most restless and
turbulent conditions. It is through our efforts to
achieve a flexible mind that we can nurture the
resiliency of the human spirit.

 As I got to know the Dalai Lama, I became
amazed at the extent of his flexibility, his capacity
to entertain a variety of viewpoints. One would
expect that his unique role as probably the
world’s most recognized Buddhist might put him
in the position of being a sort of Defender of The
Faith.
With this in mind, I asked him, “Do you ever
find yourself being too rigid in your viewpoint,
too narrow in your thinking?”
“Hmm ...” he pondered for a moment before
replying decisively. “No, I don’t think so. In fact,
it’s just the opposite. Sometimes I’m so flexible
that I’m accused of having no consistent policy.”
He broke into a robust laugh. “Someone will
come to me and present a certain idea, and I’ll
see the reason in what they’re saying and agree,

 telling them, Oh, that’s great!‘ ... But then the
next person comes along with the opposite
viewpoint, and I’ll see the reason in what they are
saying as well and agree with them also.
Sometimes I’m criticized for this and have to be
reminded, ’We’re committed to this course of
action, so for the time being let’s just keep to this
side.‘ ”
From this statement alone one might get the
impression that the Dalai Lama is indecisive, with
no guiding principles. In fact, that couldn’t be
further from the truth. The Dalai Lama clearly has
a set of basic beliefs that act as a substrate for all
his actions: A belief in the underlying goodness of
all human beings. A belief in the value of
compassion. A policy of kindness. A sense of his
commonality with all living creatures.
In speaking of the importance of being

 flexible, malleable, and adaptable, I don’t mean
to suggest that we become like chameleons—
soaking up any new belief system that we happen
to be around at the time, changing our identity,
passively absorbing every idea that we’re
exposed to. Higher stages of growth and
development depend on an underlying set of
values that can guide us. A value system that can
provide continuity and coherence to our lives, by
which we can measure our experiences. A value
system that can help us decide which goals are
truly worthwhile and which pursuits are
meaningless.
The question is, how can we consistently and
steadfastly maintain this set of underlying values
and yet remain flexible? The Dalai Lama has
seemed to achieve this by first reducing his belief
system to a few fundamental facts: 1) I am a

 human being. 2) I want to be happy and I don’t
want to suffer. 3) Other human beings, like
myself, also want to be happy and don’t want to
suffer. Emphasizing the common ground he
shares with others, rather than the differences,
results in a feeling of connection with all human
beings and leads to his basic belief in the value of
compassion and altruism. Using the same
approach, it can be tremendously rewarding
simply to take some time to reflect on our own
value system and reduce it to its fundamental
principles. It is the ability to reduce our value
system to its most basic elements, and live from
that vantage point, that allows us the greatest
freedom and flexibility to deal with the vast array
of problems that confront us on a daily basis.

 FINDING BALANCE

Developing a flexible approach to living is not
only instrumental in helping us cope with
everyday problems—it also becomes the
cornerstone for a key element of a happy life:
balance.
Settling comfortably into his chair one
morning, the Dalai Lama explained the value of
leading a balanced life.
“A balanced and skillful approach to life,
taking care to avoid extremes, becomes a very
important factor in conducting one’s everyday
existence. It is important in all aspects of life. For
instance, in planting a sapling of a plant or a tree,
at its very early stage you have to be very skillful

 and gentle. Too much moisture will destroy it, too
much sunlight will destroy it. Too little will also
destroy it. So what you need is a very balanced
environment where the sapling can have a healthy
growth. Or, for a person’s physical health, too
much or too little of any one thing can have
destructive effects. For example, too much
protein I think is bad, and too little is bad.
“This gentle and skillful approach, taking care
to avoid extremes, applies to healthy mental and
emotional growth as well. For instance, if we find
ourselves becoming arrogant, being puffed up by
self-importance based on one’s supposed or
actual achievements or qualities, then the antidote
is to think more about one’s own problems and
suffering, contemplating the unsatisfactory
aspects of existence. This will assist you in
bringing down the level of your heightened state

 of mind, bringing you more down to earth. And
on the contrary, if you find that reflecting on the
unsatisfactory nature of existence, suffering and
pain and so forth, makes you feel quite
overwhelmed by the whole thing, then, again,
there’s a danger of going to the other extreme. In
that case you might become totally discouraged,
helpless, and depressed, thinking that‘Oh, I can’t
do anything, I’m worthless.’ So under such
circumstances, it’s important to be able to uplift
your mind by reflecting on your achievements, the
progress that you have made so far, and your
other positive qualities so that you can uplift your
mind and get out of that discouraged or
demoralized state of mind. So what is required
here is a kind of very balanced and skillful
approach.
“Not only is this approach helpful for one’s

 physical and emotional health, but it applies to
one’s spiritual growth as well. Now, for instance,
the Buddhist tradition includes many different
techniques and practices. But it is very important
to be very skillful in one’s application of the
various techniques, and not to be too extreme.
One needs a balanced and skillful approach here
too. When undertaking Buddhist practice it is
important to have a coordinated approach,
combining studying and learning with the
practices of contemplation and meditation. This is
important so that there won’t be any imbalances
between academic or intellectual learning and
practical implementation. Otherwise, there is a
danger that too much intellectualization will kill
the more contemplative practices. But then, too
much emphasis on practical implementation
without study will kill the understanding. So there

 has got to be a balance....”
After a moment’s reflection, he added, “So, in
other words, the practice of Dbarma, real
spiritual practice, is in some sense like a voltage
stabilizer. The function of the stabilizer is to
prevent irregular power surges and instead give
you a stable and constant source of power.”
“You stress the importance of avoiding
extremes,” I inserted, “but isn’t going to extremes
what provides the excitement and zest in life? By
avoiding all extremes in life, always choosing the
‘middle way,’ doesn’t that just lead to a bland,
colorless existence?”
Shakinghis head no, he answered, “I think
you need to understand the source or basis of
extreme behavior. Take for example the pursuit
of material goods—shelter, furniture, clothing,
and so on. On one hand, poverty can be seen as

 a sort of extreme and we have every right to
strive to overcome this and assure our physical
comfort. On the other hand, too much luxury,
pursuing excessive wealth is another extreme.
Our ultimate aim in seeking more wealth is a
sense of satisfaction, of happiness. But the very
basis of seeking more is a feeling of not having
enough, a feeling of discontentment. That feeling
of discontentment, of wanting more and more
and more, doesn’t arise from the inherent
desirability of the objects we are seeking but
rather from our own mental state.
“So I think that our tendency to go to
extremes is often fueled by an underlying feeling
of discontentment. And of course there may be
other factors which lead to extremes. But I think
it is important to recognize that while going to
extremes may seem appealing or ‘exciting’ on the

 surface, it can in fact be harmful. There are many
examples of the dangers of going to extremes, of
extreme behavior. I think that by examining these
situations you’il be able to see that the
consequence of going to extremes is that you,
yourself, will eventually suffer. For example, on a
planetary scale if we engage in excessive fishing,
without proper regard for long-term
consequences, without a sense of responsibility,
then it results in depletion of the fish population...
Or sexual behavior. Of course there is the
biological sexual drive for reproduction and so
on, and the satisfaction one gets from sexual
activity. But if sexual behavior becomes extreme,
without proper responsibility, it leads to so many
problems, abuses ... like sexual abuse and
incest.”
“You mentioned that in addition to a feeling of

 discontentment, there may be other factors that
lead to extremes....”
“Yes, certainly.” He nodded.
“Can you give an example?”
“I think narrow-mindedness could be another
factor that leads to extremes.”
“Narrow-mindedness in the sense of...?”
“The example of excessive fishing leading to
depletion of the fish population would be an
instance of narrow thinking, in the sense that one
is looking only at the short term, and ignoring the
wider picture. Here, one could use education and
knowledge to widen one’s perspective and
become less narrow in one’s viewpoint.”
The Dalai Lama picked up his rosary from a
side table, rubbing it between his hands as he
silently mulled over the issue under discussion.
Glancing at his rosary, he suddenly continued, “I

 think in many ways narrow-minded attitudes lead
to extreme thinking. And this creates problems.
For instance, Tibet was a Buddhist nation for
many centuries. Naturally that resulted in
Tibetans feeling that Buddhism was the best
religion, and a tendency to feel that it would be a
good thing if all of humanity became Buddhist.
The idea that everyone should be Buddhist is
quite extreme. And that kind of extreme thinking
just causes problems. But now that we’ve left
Tibet, we’ve had a chance to come into contact
with other religious traditions and learn about
them. This has resulted in coming closer to reality
—real—izing that among humanity there are so
many different mental dispositions. Even if we
tried to make the whole world Buddhist it would
be impractical. Through closer contact with other
traditions you realize the positive things about

 them. Now, when confronted with another
religion, initially a positive feeling, a comfortable
feeling, will arise. We’ll feel if that person finds a
different tradition more suitable, more effective,
then that’s good! Then it’s like going to a
restaurant-we can all sit down at one table and
order different dishes according to one’s own
taste. We might eat different dishes, but nobody
argues about it!
“So, I think that by deliberately broadening
our outlook we can often overcome the kind of
extreme thinking that leads to such negative
consequences.”
With this thought, the Dalai Lama slipped his
rosary around his wrist, patted my hand amiably,
and rose to end the discussion.

 Chapter 11

FINDING MEANING IN PAIN AND
SUFFERING

Victor Frankl, a Jewish psychiatrist imprisoned
by the Nazis in World War II, once said, “Man is
ready and willing to shoulder any suffering as

 soon and as long as he can see a meaning in it.”
Frankl used his brutal and inhumane experience
in the concentration camps to gain insight into
how people survived the atrocities. Closely
observing who survived and who didn‘t, he
determined that survival wasn’t based on youth
or physical strength but rather on the strength
derived from purpose, and the discovery of
meaning in one’s life and experience.
Finding meaning in suffering is a powerful
method of helping us cope even during the most
trying times in our lives. But finding meaning in
our suffering is not an easy task. Suffering often
seems to occur at random, senselessly and
indiscriminately, with no meaning at all, let alone a
purposeful or positive meaning. And while we are
in the midst of our pain and suffering, all our
energy is focused on getting away from it. During

 periods of acute crisis and tragedy it seems
impossible to reflect on any possible meaning
behind our suffering. At those times, there is often
little we can do but endure. And it’s natural to
view our suffering as senseless and unfair, and
wonder, “Why me?” Fortunately, however,
during times of comparative ease, periods before
or after acute experiences of suffering, we can
reflect on suffering, seeking to develop an
understanding of its meaning. And the time and
effort we spend searching for meaning in suffering
will pay great rewards when bad things begin to
strike. But in order to reap those rewards, we
must begin our search for meaning when things
are going well. A tree with strong roots can
withstand the most violent storm, but the tree
can’t grow roots just as the storm appears on the
horizon.

 So where do we begin in our search for
meaning in suffering? For many people, the
search begins with their religious tradition.
Although different religions may have different
ways of understanding the meaning and purpose
of human suffering, every world religion offers
strategies for responding to suffering based on its
underlying beliefs. In the Buddhist and Hindu
models, for example, suffering is a result of our
own negative past actions and is seen as a
catalyst for seeking spiritual liberation.
In the Judeo-Christian tradition, the universe
was created by a good and just God, and even
though His master plan may be mysterious and
indecipherable at times, our faith and trust in His
plan allow us to tolerate our suffering more easily,
trusting, as the Talmud says, that “Everything
God does, He does for the best.” Life may still

 be painful, but like the pain a woman experiences
in childbirth, we trust that the pain will be
outweighed by the ultimate good it produces. The
challenge in these traditions lies in the fact that,
unlike in childbirth, the ultimate good is often not
revealed to us. Still, those with a strong faith in
God are sustained by a belief in God’s ultimate
purpose for our suffering, as a Hasidic sage
advises, “When a man suffers, he ought not to
say, ‘That’s bad! That’s bad!’ Nothing God
imposes on man is bad. But it is all right to say,
‘That’s bitter! That’s bitter!’ For among
medicines there are some that are made with
bitter herbs.” So, from the Judeo-Christian
perspective, suffering can serve many purposes: it
can test and potentially strengthen our faith, it can
bring us closer to God in a very fundamental and
intimate way, or it can loosen the bonds to the

 material world and make us cleave to God as our
refuge.
While a person’s religious tradition may offer
valuable assistance in finding meaning, even those
who do not subscribe to a religious worldview
may upon careful reflection find meaning and
value behind their suffering. Despite the universal
unpleasantness, there is little doubt that our
suffering can test, strengthen, and deepen the
experience of life. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.,
once said, “What does not destroy me, makes
me stronger.” And while it is natural to recoil
from suffering, suffering can also challenge us and
at times even bring out the best in us. In The
Third Man, author Graham Green observes, “In
Italy for thirty years under the Borgias, they had
warfare, terror, murder, and bloodshed—but
they produced Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci,

 and the Renaissance. In Switzerland, they have
brotherly love, five hundred years of democracy
and peace, and what did they produce? The
cuckoo clock.”
While at times suffering can serve to toughen
us, to strengthen us, at other times it can have
value by functioning in the opposite manner-to
soften us, to make us more sensitive and gentle.
The vulnerability we experience in the midst of
our suffering can open us and deepen our
connection with others. The poet William
Wordsworth once claimed, “A deep distress hath
humanized my soul.” In illustrating this humanizing
effect of suffering, an acquaintance, Robert,
comes to mind. Robert was the CEO of a very
successful corporation. Several years ago, he
suffered a serious financial setback that triggered
a severe immobilizing depression. We met one

 day during the depths of his depression. I had
always known Robert to be the model of
confidence and enthusiasm, and I was alarmed to
see him looking so despondent. With intense
anguish in his voice, Robert reported, “This is the
worst I’ve ever felt in my life. I just can’t seem to
shake it. I didn’t know that it was even possible
to feel so overwhelmed and hopeless and out of
control.” After discussing his difficulties for a
while, I referred him to a colleague for treatment
of his depression.
Several weeks later, I ran into Robert’s wife
Karen and asked her how he was doing. “He’s
doing much better thanks. The psychiatrist you
recommended prescribed an antidepressant
medication which is helping a lot. Of course, it’s
still going to take a while for us to work through
the problems with the business, but he’s feeling

 much better now and we’re going to be all right
...”
“I’m really glad to hear that.”
Karen hesitated a moment, then confided,
“You know, I hated to see him go through that
depression. But in a way, I think it has been a
blessing. One night during a fit of depression he
began crying uncontrollably. He couldn’t stop. I
ended up just holding him in my arms for hours
while he wept, until he finally fell asleep. In
twenty-three years of marriage, that’s the first
time something like that has happened ... and to
be honest I’ve never felt so close to him in my
life. And even though his depression is better
now, things are different somehow. Something
seemed to just break open ... and that feeling of
closeness is still there. The fact that he shared his
problem and we went through it together

 somehow changed our relationship, made us
much closer.”
In searching for ways that one’s personal
suffering can take on meaning, we turn once
again to the Dalai Lama, who illustrated how
suffering can be put to practical use within the
context of the Buddhist path.
“In Buddhist practice, you can use your
personal suffering in a formal way to enhance
your compassion—by using it as an opportunity
for the practice of Tong-Len. This is a Mahayana
visualization practice in which one mentally
visualizes taking on another’s pain and suffering,
and in turn giving them all of your resources,
good health, fortune, and so on. I will give
instruction on this practice in greater detail later
on. So, in doing this practice, when you undergo
illness, pain, or suffering, you can use that as an

 opportunity by thinking, ‘May my suffering be a
substitute for the suffering of all other sentient
beings. By experiencing this, may I be able to
save all other sentient beings who may have to
undergo similar suffering.’ So you use your
suffering as an opportunity for the practice of
taking others’ suffering upon yourself.
“Here, I should point out one thing. If, for
instance, you become ill and practice this
technique, thinking, ‘May my illness act as a
substitute for others who are suffering from
similar illnesses,’ and you visualize taking on their
illness and suffering and giving them your good
health, I’m not suggesting that you ignore your
own health. When dealing with illnesses, first of
all it’s important to take preventative measures so
you don’t suffer from these illnesses, like taking
all the precautionary measures such as adopting

 the right diet or whatever it may be. And then
when you become ill, it is important not to
overlook the necessity of taking the appropriate
medications and all the other methods that are
conventional.
“However, once you do become ill, practices
such as Tong-Len can make a significant
difference in how you respond to the situation of
illness in terms of your mental attitude. Instead of
moaning about your situation, feeling sorry for
yourself, and being overwhelmed by anxiety and
worry, you can, in fact, save yourself from
additional mental pain and suffering by adopting
the right attitude. Practicing Tong-Len
meditation, or ‘giving and receiving,’ may not
necessarily succeed in alleviating the real physical
pain or lead to a cure in physical terms, but what
it can do is protect you from unnecessary

 additional psychological pain, suffering, and
anguish. You can think, ‘May I, by experiencing
this pain and suffering, be able to help other
people and save others who may have to go
through the same experience.’ Then your
suffering takes on new meaning as it is used
as the basis for a religious or spiritual
practice. And on top of that, it is also possible in
the cases of some individuals practicing this
technique, that instead of being sorry and
saddened by the experience, the person can see
it as a kind of privilege. The person can perceive
it as a kind of opportunity and, in fact, be joyful
because this particular experience has made him
or her richer.”
“You mention that suffering can be used in the
practice of Tong-Len. And earlier you discussed
the fact that intentional contemplation of our

 suffering nature ahead of time can be helpful in
preventing us from becoming overwhelmed when
difficult situations arise ... in the sense of
developing greater acceptance of suffering as a
natural part of life...”
“That’s very true ...,” the Dalai Lama nodded.
“Are there other ways that our suffering can
be seen as having some meaning, or at least the
contemplation of our suffering as having some
practical value?”
“Yes,” he replied, “definitely. I think earlier
we mentioned that within the framework of the
Buddhist path, reflecting on suffering has
tremendous importance because by realizing the
nature of suffering, you will develop greater
resolve to put an end to the causes of suffering
and the unwholesome deeds that lead to
suffering. And it will increase your enthusiasm for

 engaging in the wholesome actions and deeds
that lead to happiness and joy.”
“And do you see any benefits of reflecting on
suffering for non-Buddhists?”
“Yes, I think it can have some practical value
in some situations. For example, reflecting on
your suffering can reduce your arrogance, your
feeling of conceit. Of course,” he laughed
heartily, “this may not be seen as a practical
benefit or be a convincing reason for someone
who doesn’t consider arrogance or pride to be a
fault.”
Becoming more serious, the Dalai Lama
added, “But anyway, I think that there is one
aspect to our experience of suffering that is of
vital importance. When you are aware of your
pain and suffering, it helps you to develop your
capacity for empathy, the capacity that allows

 you to relate to other people’s feelings and
suffering. This enhances your capacity for
compassion towards others. So as an aid in
helping us connect with others, it can be seen as
having value.
“So,” the Dalai Lama concluded, “looking at
suffering in these ways, our attitude may begin to
change; our suffering may not be as worthless
and bad as we think.”

 DEALING WITH PHYSICAL PAIN

By reflecting on suffering during the quieter
moments of our lives, when things are relatively
stable and going well, we may often discover a
deeper value and meaning in our suffering.
Sometimes, however, we may be confronted
with kinds of suffering that seem to have no
purpose, with no redeeming qualities whatsoever.
Physical pain and suffering often seem to belong
to that category. But there is a difference
between physical pain, which is a physiological
process, and suffering, which is our mental and
emotional response to the pain. So, the questions
arises: Can finding an underlying purpose and
meaning behind our pain modify our attitude

 about it? And can a change in attitude lessen the
degree to which we suffer when we are
physically injured?
In his book, Pain: The Gift Nobody Wants,
Dr. Paul Brand explores the purpose and value
of physical pain. Dr. Brand, a world-renowned
hand surgeon and leprosy specialist, spent his
early years in India where, as the son of
missionaries, he was surrounded by people living
under conditions of extreme hardship and
suffering. Noticing that physical pain seemed to
be expected and tolerated much more than in the
West, Dr. Brand became interested in the pain
system in the human body. Eventually, he began
working with leprosy patients in India and made
a remarkable discovery. He found that the
ravages of leprosy and the horrible disfigurements
were not due to the disease organism directly

 causing the rotting of the flesh, but rather it was
because the disease caused loss of pain sensation
in the limbs. Without the protection of pain, the
leprosy patients lacked the system to warn them
of tissue damage. Thus, Dr. Brand observed
patients walking or running on limbs with broken
skin or even exposed bones; this caused
continuous deterioration. Without pain,
sometimes they would even stick their hands in a
fire to retrieve something. He noticed an utter
nonchalance toward self-destruction. In his book,
Dr. Brand recounted story after story of the
devastating effects of living without pain sensation
—of the repetitive injuries, of cases of rats
gnawing off fingers and toes while the patient
slept peacefully.
After a lifetime of working with patients
suffering from pain and those suffering from lack

 of pain, Dr. Brand gradually came to view pain
not as the universal enemy as seen in the West
but as a remarkable, elegant, and sophisticated
biological system that warns us of damage to our
body and thus protects us. But why must the
experience of pain be so unpleasant? He
concluded that the very unpleasantness of pain,
the part that we hate, is what makes it so
effective in protecting us and warning us of
danger and injury. The unpleasant quality of pain
forces the entire human organism to attend to the
problem. Although the body has automatic
reflexive movements that form an outer layer of
protection and move us quickly away from the
pain, it is the feeling of unpleasantness that
galvanizes and compels the entire organism to
attend and act. It also sears the experience into
the memory and serves to protect us in the future.

 In the same way that finding meaning in our
suffering can help us cope with life’s problems,
Dr. Brand feels that an understanding of the
purpose of physical pain can lessen our suffering
when pain arises. In view of this theory, he offers
the concept of “pain insurance.” He feels that we
can prepare for pain ahead of time, while healthy,
by gaining insight into the reason we have it and
taking the time to reflect on what life would be
without pain. However, since acute pain can
demolish objectivity, we must reflect on these
things before pain strikes. But if we can begin to
think of pain as a “speech your body is delivering
about a subject that is of vital importance to you,
in the most effective way of getting your
attention,” then our attitude about pain will begin
to change. And as our attitude about pain
changes, our suffering will diminish. As Dr. Brand

 states, “I am convinced that the attitude we
cultivate in advance may well determine how
suffering will affect us when it does strike.” He
believes that we can even develop gratitude in the
face of pain. We may not be grateful for the
experience of pain, but we can be grateful for
the system of pain perception.
There is no doubt that our attitude and mental
outlook can strongly affect the degree to which
we suffer when we are in physical pain. Let’s
say, for instance, that two individuals, a
construction worker and a concert pianist, suffer
the same finger injury. While the amount of
physical pain might be the same for both
individuals, the construction worker might suffer
very little and in fact rejoice if the injury resulted
in a month of paid vacation which he or she was
in need of, whereas the same injury could result

 in intense suffering to the pianist who viewed
playing as his or her primary source of joy in life.
The idea that our mental attitude influences
our ability to perceive and endure pain isn’t
limited to theoretical situations such as this; it has
been demonstrated by many scientific studies and
experiments. Researchers looking into this issue
began by tracing the pathways of how pain is
perceived and experienced. Pain begins with a
sensory signal—an alarm that goes off when
nerve endings are stimulated by something that is
sensed as dangerous. Millions of signals are sent
through the spinal cord to the base of the brain.
These signals are then sorted out and a message
is sent to higher areas of the brain telling of pain.
The brain then sorts through the prescreened
messages and decides on a response. It is at this
stage that the mind can assign value and meaning

 to the pain and intensify or modify our perception
of pain;we convert pain into suffering in the
mind. To lessen the suffering of pain, we need to
make a crucial distinction between the pain of
pain and the pain we create by our thoughts
about the pain. Fear, anger, guilt, loneliness, and
helplessness are all mental and emotional
responses that can intensify pain. So, in
developing an approach to dealing with pain, we
can of course work at the lower levels of pain
perception, using the tools of modern medicine
such as medications and other procedures, but
we can also work at the higher levels by
modifying our outlook and attitude.
Many researchers have examined the role of
the mind in the perception of pain. Pavlov even
trained dogs to overcome the pain instinct by
associating an electrical shock with a food

 reward. Researcher Ronald Melzak took
Pavlov’s experiments a step further. He raised
Scottish terrier pups in a padded environment in
which they wouldn’t encounter the normal
knocks and scrapes of growing up. These dogs
failed to learn basic responses to pain; they failed
to react, for instance, when their paws were
pricked with a pin, as opposed to their littermates
who squealed with pain when pricked. On the
basis of experiments such as these, he concluded
that much of what we call pain, including the
unpleasant emotional response, was learned
rather than instinctive. Other experiments with
human beings, involving hypnosis and placebos,
have also demonstrated that in many cases the
higher brain functions can overrule the pain
signals from the lower stages on the pain
pathway. This indicates how the mind can often

 determine how we perceive pain and helps
explain the interesting findings of investigators
such as Dr. Richard Sternback and Bernard
Tursky at Harvard Medical School (and later
reaffirmed in a study by Dr. Maryann Bates et
al.) who noted that there were significant
differences among different ethnic groups in their
ability to perceive and withstand pain.
So it seems that the assertion that our attitude
about pain can influence the degree to which we
suffer is not simply based on philosophical
speculation but is backed up by scientific
evidence. And if our investigation into the
meaning and value of pain results in a change of
attitude about pain, our efforts will not be
wasted. In seeking to discover an underlying
purpose of our pain, Dr. Brand makes one
additional fascinating and critical observation. He

 describes many reports of leprosy patients’
claiming, “Of course, I can see my hands and my
feet, but somehow they don’t feel like part of me.
It feels as if they are just tools.” Thus, pain not
only warns us and protects us, but it unifies us.
Without pain sensation in our hands or feet, those
parts no longer seem to belong to our body.
In the same way that physical pain unifies our
sense of having a body, we can conceive of the
general experience of suffering acting as a
unifying force that connects us with others.
Perhaps that is the ultimate meaning behind our
suffering. It is our suffering that is the most
basic element that we share with others, the
factor that unifies us with all living creatures.

 We conclude our discussion of human suffering
with the Dalai Lama’s instruction on the practice
of Tong-Len, which he referred to in our earlier
conversation. As he will explain, the purpose of
this visualization meditation is to strengthen one’s
compassion. But it can also be seen as a
powerful tool in helping transmute one’s personal
suffering. When undergoing any form of suffering
or hardship, one can use this practice to enhance
one’s compassion by visualizing relieving others
who are going through similar suffering, by
absorbing and dissolving their suffering into your
own—a kind of suffering by proxy.
The Dalai Lama presented this instruction
before a large audience on a particularly hot
September afternoon in Tucson. The hall’s air
conditioning units, struggling against the soaring

 desert temperatures outside, were ultimately
overcome by the additional heat generated by
sixteen hundred bodies. Temperatures in the
room began to climb, creating a general level of
discomfort that was particularly appropriate for
the practice of a meditation on suffering.

 The Practice of Tong-Len

“This afternoon, let us meditate on the practice of
Tong-Len, ‘Giving and Receiving.’ This practice
is meant to help train the mind, to strengthen the
natural power and force of compassion. This is
achieved because Tong-Len meditation helps
counteract our selfishness. It increases the power
and strength of our mind by enhancing our
courage to open ourselves to others’ suffering.
“To begin this exercise, first visualize on one
side of you a group of people who are in
desperate need of help, those who are in an
unfortunate state of suffering, those living under
conditions of poverty, hardship, and pain.
Visualize this group of people on one side of you

 clearly in your mind. Then, on the other side,
visualize yourself as the embodiment of a selfcentered person, with a customary selfish
attitude, indifferent to the well-being and needs of
others. And then in between this suffering group
of people and this selfish representation of you
see yourself in the middle, as a neutral observer.
“Next, notice which side you are naturally
inclined towards. Are you more inclined towards
that single individual, the embodiment of
selfishness? Or do your natural feelings of
empathy reach out to the group of weaker
people who are in need? If you look objectively,
you can see that the well-being of a group or
large number of individuals is more important
than that of one single individual.
“After that, focus your attention on the needy
and desperate people. Direct all your positive

 energy to them. Mentally give them your
successes, your resources, your collection of
virtues. And after you have done that, visualize
taking upon yourself their suffering, their
problems, and all their negativities.
“For example, you can visualize an innocent
starving child from Somalia and feel how you
would respond naturally towards that sight. In
this instance, when you experience a deep feeling
of empathy towards the suffering of that
individual, it isn’t based on considerations
like‘He’s my relative’ or ’She’s my friend.‘ You
don’t even know that person. But the fact that
the other person is a human being and you,
yourself, are a human being allows your natural
capacity for empathy to emerge and enable you
to reach out. So you can visualize something like
that and think, ’This child has no capacity of his

 or her own to be able to relieve himself or herself
from his or her present state of difficulty or
hardship.‘ Then, mentally take upon yourself all
the suffering of poverty, starvation, and the
feeling of deprivation, and mentally give your
facilities, wealth, and success to this child. So,
through practicing this kind of ’giving-andreceiving’ visualization, you can train your mind.
“When engaging in this practice it is
sometimes helpful to begin by first imagining your
own future suffering and, with an attitude of
compassion, take your own future suffering upon
yourself right now, with the sincere wish of
freeing yourself from all future suffering. After you
gain some practice in generating a compassionate
state of mind towards yourself, you can then
expand the process to include taking on the
suffering of others.

 “When you do the visualization of‘taking upon
yourself,’ it is useful to visualize these sufferings,
problems, and difficulties in the form of
poisonous substances, dangerous weapons, or
terrifying animals—things the very sight of which
normally makes you shudder. So, visualize the
suffering in these forms, and then absorb them
directly into your heart.
“The purpose of visualizing these negative and
frightening forms being dissolved into our hearts
is to destroy our habitual selfish attitudes that
reside there. However, for those individuals who
may have problems with self-image, self-hatred,
anger towards themselves, or low self-esteem,
then it is important to judge for themselves
whether this particular practice is appropriate or
not. It may not be.
“This Tong-Len practice can become quite

 powerful if you combine the‘giving andreceiving’
with the breath; that is, imagine’ receiving’ when
inhaling and’giving’ when exhaling. When you do
this visualization effectively, it will make you feel
some slight discomfort. That is an indication that
it is hitting its target—the self-centered,
egocentric attitude that we normally have. Now,
let us meditate.”

At the conclusion of his instruction on Tong-Len,
the Dalai Lama made an important point. No
particular exercise will appeal to or be
appropriate for everyone. In our spiritual journey
it’s important for each of us to decide whether a
particular practice is appropriate for us.

 Sometimes a practice will not appeal to us
initially, and before it can be effective, we need to
understand it better. This certainly was the case
for me when I followed the Dalai Lama’s
instruction on Tong-Len that afternoon. I found
that I had some difficulty with it—a certain feeling
of resistance—although I couldn’t put my finger
on it at the moment. Later that evening, however,
I thought about the Dalai Lama’s instruction and
realized that my feeling of resistance developed
early in his instruction at the point where he
concluded that the group of individuals was more
important than the single individual. It was a
concept I had heard before, namely, the Vulcan
axiom pro-pounded by Mr. Spock in Star Trek:
The needs of the many outweigb the needs of
the one. But there was one sticking point to that
argument. Before bringing it up to the Dalai

 Lama, perhaps not wanting to come across as
being just “out for number one,” I sounded out a
friend who was a longtime student of Buddhism.
“One thing bothers me ...,” I said. “Saying
that the needs of a large group of people
outweigh those of just one single person makes
sense in theory, but in everyday life we don’t
interact with people en masse. We interact with
one person at a time, with a series of individuals.
Now, on that one-to-one level, why should that
individual’s needs outweigh my own? I’m also a
single individual ... We’re equal ...”
My friend thought for a moment. “Well, that’s
true. But I think that if you could try to consider
each individual as truly equal to yourself—no
more important but no less either—I think that
would be enough to start with.”
I never brought up the issue with the Dalai

 Lama.

 Part IV

OVERCOMING OBSTACLES

 Chapter 12

BRINGING ABOUT CHANGE

 THE PROCESS OF CHANGE

We’ve discussed the possibility of achieving
happiness by working toward eliminating our
negative behaviors and states of mind. In general,
what would be your approach to actually
accomplishing this, to overcoming negative
behaviors and making positive changes in one’s
life?“ I asked.
“The first step involves learning,” the Dalai
Lama replied, “education. Earlier, I think I
mentioned the importance of learning ...” 11
“You mean when we talked about the
importance of learning about how the negative
emotions and behaviors are harmful to our pursuit

 of happiness, and the positive emotions are
helpful?”
“Yes. But in discussing an approach to
bringing about positive changes within oneself,
learning is only the first step. There are other
factors as well: conviction, determination, action,
and effort. So the next step is developing
conviction. Learning and education are
important because they help one develop
conviction of the need to change and help
increase one’s commitment. This conviction to
change then develops into determination.
Next, one transforms determination into
action—the strong determination to change
enables one to make a sustained effort to
implement the actual changes. This final factor
of effort is critical.
“So, for example, if you are trying to stop

 smoking, first you have to be aware that smoking
is harmful to the body. You have to be educated.
I think, for instance, that information and public
education about the harmful effects of smoking
have modified people’s behavior; I think that
now many fewer people smoke in Western
countries than in a communist country like China
because of the availability of information. But that
learning alone is often not sufficient. You have to
increase that awareness until it leads to a firm
conviction about the harmful effects of smoking.
This strengthens your determination to change.
Finally, you must exert the effort to establish new
habit patterns. This is the way that inner change
and transformation take place in all things, no
matter what you are trying to accomplish.
“Now, no matter what behavior you are
seeking to change, no matter what particular goal

 or action you are directing your efforts towards,
you need to start by developing a strong
willingness or wish to do it. You need to generate
great enthusiasm. And, here, a sense of urgency
is a key factor. This sense of urgency is a
powerful factor in helping you overcome
problems. For example, knowledge about the
serious effects of AIDS has created a sense of
urgency that has put a check on a lot of people’s
sexual behavior. I think that often, once you
obtain the proper information, that sense of
seriousness and commitment will come.
“So, this sense of urgency can be a vital factor
in effecting change. It can give us tremendous
energy. For instance, in a political movement, if
there is a sense of desperation, there can be a
tremendous sense of urgency—so much that the
people may even forget that they are hungry, and

 there is no feeling of tiredness or exhaustion in
pursuit of their objectives.
“The importance of urgency not only applies
to overcoming problems on a personal level, but
on a community and global level as well. When I
was in St. Louis, for instance, I met the governor.
There, they had recently had severe flooding. The
governor told me that when the flood first
happened, he was quite concerned that given the
individualistic nature of society, people might not
be so cooperative, that they might not commit
themselves to this concerted and cooperative
effort. But when the crisis happened, he was
amazed by the response of the people. They
were so cooperative and so committed to the
concerted effort in dealing with the flood
problems that he was very impressed. So to my
mind, this shows that in order to accomplish

 important goals, we need an appreciation of the
sense of urgency, like in this case; the crisis was
so urgent that people instinctively joined forces
and responded to the crisis. Unfortunately,” he
said sadly, “often we don’t have that sense of
urgency.”
I was surprised to hear him stress the
importance of the sense of urgency given the
Western stereotype of the Asian “Let it be”
attitude engendered by a belief in many lifetimes;
if it doesn’t happen now, there’s always next time
...
“But then the question is, how do you develop
that strong sense of enthusiasm to change or
urgency in everyday life? Is there a particular
Buddhist approach?” I asked.
“For a Buddhist practitioner, there are various
techniques used to generate enthusiasm,” the

 Dalai Lama answered. “In order to generate a
sense of confidence and enthusiasm, we find in
the Buddha’s text a discussion of the
preciousness of human existence. We talk about
how much potential lies within our body, how
meaningful it can be, the good purposes it can be
used for, the benefits and advantages of having a
human form, and so on. And these discussions
are there to instill a sense of confidence and
courage and to induce a sense of commitment to
use our human body in a positive way.
“Then, in order to generate a sense of urgency
to engage in spiritual practices, the practitioner is
reminded of our impermanence, of death. When
we talk about impermanence in this context, we
are talking in very conventional terms, not about
the more subtle aspects of the concept of
impermanence. In other words, we are reminded

 that one day, we may no longer be here. That
sort of understanding. That awareness of
impermanence is encouraged, so that when it is
coupled with our appreciation of the enormous
potential of our human existence, it will give us a
sense of urgency that we must use every
precious moment.”
“That contemplation of our impermanence
and death seems to be a powerful technique,” I
remarked, “to help motivate one, develop a
sense of urgency to effect positive changes.
Couldn’t that be used as a technique for nonBuddhists as well?”
“I think one might take care in the application
of the various techniques to non-Buddhists,” he
said thoughtfully. “Perhaps this might apply more
to Buddhist practices. After all,” he laughed, “one
could use the same contemplation for exactly the

 opposite purpose—‘Oh, there is no guarantee
that I am going to be alive tomorrow, so I might
as well just have lots of fun today!’ ”
“Do you have any suggestions for how nonBuddhists might develop that sense of urgency?”
He replied, “Well, as I pointed out, that’s
where information and education come in. For
example, before I met certain experts or
specialists, I was unaware of the crisis about the
environment. But once I met them and they
explained the problems that we are facing, then I
became aware of the seriousness of the situation.
This can apply to other problems that we face as
well.”
“But sometimes, even having information, we
still might not have the energy to change. How
can we overcome that?” I asked.
The Dalai Lama paused to think, then said, “I

 think that there might be different categories here.
One kind may arise out of some biological
factors that may be contributing to the apathy or
lack of energy. When the cause of one’s apathy
or lack of energy is due to biological factors, one
may need to work on one’s lifestyle. So, if one
tries to get sufficient sleep, eat a healthy diet,
abstain from alcohol, and so on, these kinds of
things will help make one’s mind more alert. And
in some cases one may even need to resort to
medication or other physical remedies if the
cause is due to illness. But then there’s another
kind of apathy or laziness—the kind that arises
purely out of a certain weakness of mind ...”
“Yes, that’s the kind I was referring to ...”
“To overcome that kind of apathy and to
generate commitment and enthusiasm to
overcome negative behaviors or states of mind,

 once again I think the most effective method, and
perhaps the only solution, is to be constantly
aware of the destructive effects of the negative
behavior. One may need to repeatedly remind
oneself of those destructive effects.”
The Dalai Lama’s words rang true, yet as a
psychiatrist, I was acutely aware of how strongly
entrenched some negative behaviors and ways of
thinking could become, how difficult it was for
some people to change. Assuming that there
were complex psy chodynamic factors at play, I
had spent countless hours examining and
dissecting patients’ resistance to change. Turning
this over in my mind, I asked:
“People often want to make positive changes
in their lives, engage in healthier behaviors, and
so on. But sometimes there just seems to be a
sort of inertia or resistance ... How would you

 explain how that occurs?”
“That’s quite easy ... ,” he began casually.
EASY?
“It’s because we simply become habituated
or accustomed to doing things in certain ways.
And then, we become sort of spoiled, doing only
the things that we like to do, that we are used to
doing.”
“But how can we overcome that?”
“By using habituation to our advantage.
Through constant familiarity, we can
definitely establish new behavior patterns.
Here’s an example : In Dharamsala I usually
wake up and start the day at 3:30, although here
in Arizona these days I wake up at 4:30; I get
one more hour’s sleep,” he laughed. “At the
beginning you need a little bit of effort to get used
to this, but after a few months, it becomes sort of

 a set routine and you don’t need to make any
special effort. So even if you were to go to bed
late, you might have a tendency to want a few
more minutes’ sleep, but you still get up at 3:30
without having to give special thought to it, and
you can get up and do your daily practices. This
is due to the force of habituation.
“So, by making a steady effort, I think we can
overcome any form of negative conditioning and
make positive changes in our lives. But you still
need to realize that genuine change doesn’t
happen overnight. Now, for example, in my own
case, I think if I compare my normal state of
mind today to, say, twenty or thirty years ago,
there’s a big difference. But this difference, I
came to step by step. I started to learn Buddhism
around the age of five or six, but at that time I
had no interest in Buddhist teachings,” he

 laughed, “although I was called the highest
reincarnation. I think it wasn’t until I was around
sixteen years old that I really began to have some
serious feeling about Buddhism. And I tried to
start serious practice. Then, over the course of
many years, I began to develop a deep
appreciation of Buddhist principles, and
practices, which initially seemed so impossible
and almost unnatural, became much more natural
and easy to relate to. This occurred through
gradual familiarization. Of course, this process
took more than forty years.
“So, you see, deep down, mental
development takes time. If someone says, ‘Oh,
through many years of hardship things have
changed,’ I can take that seriously. There’s a
greater likelihood of the changes being genuine
and longlasting. If someone says, ‘Oh, within a

 short period, say two years, there has been a big
change,’ I think that is unrealistic.”
While the Dalai Lama’s approach to change
was unarguably reasonable, there was one matter
that seemed to need to be reconciled:
“Well, you’ve mentioned the need for a high
level of enthusiasm and determination to
transform one’s mind, to make positive changes.
Yet at the same time we acknowledge that
genuine change occurs slowly and can take a
long time,” I noted. “When change takes place so
slowly, it’s easy to become discouraged. Haven’t
you ever felt discouraged by the slow rate of
progress in relation to your spiritual practice or
discouragement in other areas of your life?”
“Yes, certainly,” he said.
“How do you deal with that?” I asked.
“As far as my own spiritual practice goes, if I

 encounter some obstacles or problems, I find
it helpful to stand back and take the longterm view rather than the short-term view. In
this regard, I find that thinking about one
particular verse gives me courage and helps me
sustain my determination. It says:
As long as space endures
As long as sentient beings remain
May I too live
To dispel the miseries of the world.
“However, as far as the struggle for the
freedom of Tibet is concerned, if I utilize that
kind of belief, those verses—being prepared to
wait ‘eons and eons ... as long as space
endures,’ and so on—then ) I think I would be
foolish. Here, one needs to take more immediate

 or active involvement. Of course, in that situation,
the struggle for freedom, when I reflect on the
fourteen or fifteen years of effort at negotiation
with no results, when I think about the almost
fifteen years of failure, I develop a certain feeling
of impatience or frustration. But this feeling of
frustration doesn’t discourage me to the point of
losing hope.”
Pressing the issue a bit further, I asked, “But
what exactly prevents you from losing hope?”
“Even in the situation with Tibet, I think that
viewing the situation from a wider perspective
can definitely help. So, for instance, if I look at
the situation inside Tibet from a narrow
perspective, focusing only on that, then the
situation appears almost hopeless. However, if I
look from a wider perspective, look from a
world perspective, then I see the international

 situation in which whole communist and
totalitarian systems are collapsing, where even in
China there’s a democracy movement, and the
spirit of Tibetans remains high. So, I don’t give
up.”

Given his extensive background and training in
Buddhist philosophy and meditation, it is
interesting that the Dalai Lama identifies learning
and education as the first step in bringing about
internal transformation, rather than more
transcendental or mystical spiritual practices.
Although education is commonly acknowledged
as important in learning new skills or securing a
good job, its role as a vital factor in achieving

 happiness is widely overlooked. Yet studies have
shown that even purely academic education is
directly linked to a happier life. Numerous
surveys have conclusively found that higher levels
of education have a positive correlation with
better health and a longer life, and even protect
an individual from depression. In trying to
determine the reasons for these beneficial effects
of education, scientists have reasoned that bettereducated individuals are more aware of health
risk factors, are better able to implement healthier
lifestyle choices, feel a greater sense of
empowerment and self-esteem, have greater
problem-solving skills and more effective coping
strategies—all factors that can contribute to a
happier, healthier life. So, if merely academic
education is associated with a happier life, how
much more powerful can be the kind of learning

 and education spoken of by the Dalai Lama—
education that focuses specifically on
understanding and implementing the full spectrum
of factors that lead to lasting happiness?
The next step in the Dalai Lama’s path to
change involves generating “determination and
enthusiasm.” This step is also widely accepted by
contemporary Western science as an important
factor in achieving one’s goals. In one study, for
instance, educational psychologist Benjamin
Bloom examined the lives of some of America’s
most accomplished artists, athletes, and
scientists. He discovered that drive and
determination, not great natural talent, led to their
success in their respective fields. As in any other
field, one could assume that this principle would
equally apply to the art of achieving happiness.
Behavioral scientists have extensively

 researched the mechanisms that initiate, sustain,
and direct our activities, referring to this field as
the study of “human motivation.” Psychologists
have identified three principle types of motives.
The first type, primary motives, are drives
based on biological needs that must be met for
survival. This would include, for example, needs
for food, water, and air. Another category of
motives involves a human being’s need for
stimulation and information. Investigators
hypothesize that this is an innate need, required
for proper maturation, development, and
functioning of the nervous system. The final
category, called secondary motives, are motives
based on learned needs and drives. Many
secondary motives are related to acquired needs
for success, power, status, or achievement. At
this level of motivation, one’s behavior and drives

 can be influenced by social forces and shaped by
learning. It is at this stage that the theories of
modern psychology meet with the Dalai Lama’s
conception of developing “determination and
enthusiasm.” In the Dalai Lama’s system,
however, the drive and determination generated
are not used only in the pursuit of worldly
success but develop as one gains a clearer
understanding of the factors that lead to true
happiness and are used in the pursuit of higher
goals, such as kindness, compassion, and
spiritual development.
“Effort” is the final factor in bringing about
change. The Dalai Lama identifies effort as a
necessary factor in establishing new conditioning.
The idea that we can change our negative
behaviors and thoughts through new conditioning
is not only shared by Western psychologists, but

 it is in fact the cornerstone of contemporary
behavior therapy. This kind of therapy is based
on the basic theory that people have largely
learned to be the way they are, and, by offering
strategies to create new conditioning, behavior
therapy has proven to be effective for a broad
range of problems.
While science has recently revealed that one’s
genetic predisposition clearly plays a role in an
individual’s characteristic way of responding to
the world, most social scientists and
psychologists feel that a large measure of the way
we behave, think, and feel is determined by
learning and conditioning, which comes about as
a result of our upbringing and the social and
cultural forces around us. And since it is believed
that behaviors are largely established by
conditioning, and reinforced and amplified by

 “habituation,” this opens up the possibility, as the
Dalai Lama contends, of extinguishing harmful or
negative conditioning and replacing it with helpful,
life-enhancing conditioning.
Making a sustained effort to change external
behavior is not only helpful in overcoming bad
habits but also can change our underlying
attitudes and feelings. Experiments have shown
that not only do our attitudes and psychological
traits determine our behavior, an idea that is
commonly accepted, but our behavior can also
change our attitudes. Investigators found that
even an artificially induced frown or smile tends
to induce the corresponding emotions of anger or
happiness; this suggests that just “going through
the motions” and repeatedly engaging in a
positive behavior can eventually bring about
genuine internal change. This could have

 important implications in the Dalai Lama’s
approach to building a happier life. If we begin
with the simple act of regularly helping others, for
instance, even if we don’t feel particularly kind or
caring, we may discover an inner transformation
is taking place, as we very gradually develop
genuine feelings of compassion.

 REALISTIC EXPECTATIONS

In bringing about genuine inner transformation
and change, the Dalai Lama emphasizes the
importance of making a sustained effort. It is a
gradual process. This is in sharp contrast to the
proliferation of “quick fix” self-help techniques
and therapies that have become so popular in
Western culture in recent decades—techniques
ranging from “positive affirmations” to
“discovering your inner child.”
The Dalai Lama’s approach points toward
slow growth and maturity. He believes in the
tremendous, perhaps even unlimited, power of
the mind—but a mind that has been
systematically trained, focused, concentrated, a

 mind tempered by years of experience and sound
reasoning. It takes a long time to develop the
behavior and habits of mind that contribute to our
problems. It takes an equally long time to
establish the new habits that bring happiness.
There is no getting around these essential
ingredients: determination, effort, and time. These
are the real secrets to happiness.
When embarking on the path to change, it is
important to set reasonable expectations. If our
expectations are too high, we’re setting ourselves
up for disappointment. If they are too low, it
extinguishes our willingness to challenge our
limitations and achieve our true potential.
Following our conversation about the process of
change, the Dalai Lama explained:
“You should never lose sight of the
importance of having a realistic attitude—of being

 very sensitive and respectful to the concrete
reality of your situation as you proceed on the
path towards your ultimate goal. Recognize the
difficulties inherent in your path, and the fact that
it may take time and a consistent effort. It’s
important to make a clear distinction in your mind
between your ideals and the standards by which
you judge your progress. As a Buddhist, for
instance, you set your ideals very high: full
Enlightenment is your ultimate expectation.
Holding full Enlightenment as your ideal of
achievement is not an extreme. But expecting to
achieve it quickly, here and now, becomes an
extreme. Using that as a standard instead of
your ideal causes you to become discouraged
and completely lose hope when you don’t
quickly achieve Enlightenment. So you need a
realistic approach. On the other hand, if you say,

 ‘I’m just going to focus on the here and now;
that’s the practical thing, and I don’t care about
the future or the ultimate attainment of Buddhahood,’ then again, that is another extreme. So we
need to find an approach that is somewhere in
between. We need to find a balance.
“Dealing with expectations is really a tricky
issue. If you have excessive expectations without
a proper foundation, then that usually leads to
problems. On the other hand, without
expectation and hope, without aspiration, there
can be no progress. Some hope is essential. So
finding the proper balance is not easy. One needs
to judge each situation on the spot.”
I still had nagging doubts; although we may
certainly modify some of our negative behaviors
and attitudes given enough time and effort, to
what extent is it truly possible to eradicate the

 negative emotions? Addressing the Dalai Lama, I
began, “We’ve spoken about the fact that
ultimate happiness depends on eliminating our
negative behaviors and mental states—things like
anger, hatred, greed, and so on...”
The Dalai Lama nodded.
“But these kinds of emotions seem to be a
natural part of our psychological makeup. All
human beings seem to experience these darker
emotions to one degree or another. And if that’s
the case, is it reasonable to hate, deny, and
combat part of ourselves? I mean, it seems
impractical, and even unnatural, to try to
completely eradicate something that is an integral
part of our natural makeup.”
Shaking his head, the Dalai Lama replied,
“Yes, some people suggest that anger, hatred,
and other negative emotions are a natural part of

 our mind. They feel that since these are a natural
part of our makeup, there is no way to really
change these mental states. But that is wrong.
Now, for example, all of us are born in an
ignorant state. In this sense, ignorance is also
quite natural. Anyway, when we are young, we
are quite ignorant. But as we grow, day by day
through education and learning we can acquire
knowledge and dispel ignorance. However, if we
leave ourselves in an ignorant state without
consciously developing our learning, we won’t be
able to dispel ignorance. So, if we leave
ourselves in a ‘natural state’ without making an
effort to dispel it, then the opposing factors or
forces of education and learning do not come
naturally. And in the same way, through proper
training we can gradually reduce our negative
emotions and increase positive states of mind

 such as love, compassion, and forgiveness.”
“But if these things are a part of our psyche,
ultimately how can we be successful in fighting
against something which is part of ourselves?”
“In considering how to fight against the
negative emotions, it is useful to know how the
human mind works,” answered the Dalai Lama.
“Now the human mind is of course very complex.
But it is also very skillful. It can find many ways in
which it can deal with a variety of situations and
conditions. For one thing, the mind has the ability
to adopt different perspectives through which it
can address various problems.
“Within Buddhist practice, this ability to adopt
different perspectives is utilized in a number of
meditations in which you mentally isolate different
aspects of yourself, then engage in a dialogue
between them. For instance, there is a meditation

 practice designed to enhance altruism, whereby
you engage in a dialogue between your own
‘self-centered attitude,’ a self that is the
embodiment of self-centeredness, and yourself as
a spiritual practitioner. There is a kind of a
dialogical relationship. So similarly here, although
negative traits such as hatred and anger are part
of your mind, you can engage in an endeavor in
which you take your anger and hatred as an
object and do combat with it.
“In addition, from your own daily experience,
you often find yourself in situations in which you
blame or criticize yourself. You say, ‘Oh, on such
and such day, I let myself down.’ Then you
criticize yourself. Or, you blame yourself for
doing something wrong or for not doing
something, and you feel angry towards yourself.
So here also, you engage in a kind of dialogue

 with yourself. In reality, there are not two distinct
selves; it’s just the one continuum of the same
individual. But still, it makes sense to criticize
yourself, to feel angry towards yourself. This is
something that you all know from your own
experience.
“So although, in reality, there is only one
single individual continuum, you can adopt two
different perspectives. What takes place when
you are criticizing yourself? The ‘self’ that is
criticizing is done from a perspective of yourself
as a totality, your entire being, and the ’self’ that
is being criticized is a self from a perspective of a
particular experience or a particular event. So
you can see the possibility of having this ‘self-toself relationship.’
“To expand on this point, it may be quite
helpful to reflect upon the various aspects of

 one’s own personal identity. Let us take the
example of a Tibetan Buddhist monk. That
individual can have a sense of personalized
identity from the perspective of his being a monk,
‘myself as a monk.’ And then he can also have a
level of personal identity that is not so much
based upon his consideration of monkhood but
rather of his ethnic origin, like Tibetan, so he can
say, ‘I as a Tibetan.’ And then at another level,
that person can have another identity in which
monkhood and ethnic origin may not play any
important role. He can think, ‘I as a human
being.’ So you can see different perspectives
within each person’s individual identity.
“What this indicates is that when we
conceptually relate to something, we are capable
of looking at one phenomenon from many
different angles. And the capacity to see things

 from different angles is quite selective; we can
focus on a particular angle, a particular aspect of
that phenomenon, and adopt a particular
perspective. This capacity becomes very
important when we seek to identify and eliminate
certain negative aspects of ourselves or enhance
positive traits. Because of this capacity to
adopt a different perspective, we can isolate
parts of ourselves that we seek to eliminate
and do battle with them.
“Now, in further examining this subject, a very
important question arises: Although we may
engage in combat with anger, hatred, and the
other negative states of mind, what guarantee or
assurance do we have that it is possible to gain
victory over them?
“When speaking of these negative states of
mind, I should point out that I am referring to

 what are called Nyon Mong in Tibetan, or
Klesha in Sanskrit. This term literally means ‘that
which afflicts from within.’ That’s a long term, so
it is often translated as ‘delusions.’ The very
etymology of the Tibetan word Nyon Mong
gives you a sense that it is an emotional and
cognitive event that spontaneously afflicts your
mind, destroys your peace of mind, or brings
about a disturbance within your psyche when it
arises. If we pay close enough attention, it’s easy
to recognize the afflictive nature of these
‘delusions’ simply because they have this
tendency to destroy our calmness and presence
of mind. But it’s much more difficult to find out
whether we can overcome them. That is a
question that directly relates to the whole idea of
whether it is possible to attain the full realization
of our spiritual potential. And that is a very

 serious and difficult question.
“So, what grounds do we have to accept that
these afflictive emotions and cognitive events, or
‘delusions,’ can be ultimately rooted out and
eliminated from our minds? In Buddhist thought,
we have three principal premises or grounds on
which we believe that that can happen.
“The first premise is that all ‘deluded’ states
of mind, all afflictive emotions and thoughts, are
essentially distorted, in that they are rooted in
misperceiving the actual reality of the situation.
No matter how powerful, deep down these
negative emotions have no valid foundation. They
are based on ignorance. On the other hand, all
the positive emotions or states of mind, such as
love, compassion, insight, and so on have a solid
basis. When the mind is experiencing these
positive states, there is no distortion. In addition,

 these positive factors are grounded in reality.
They can be verified by our own experience.
There is a kind of grounding and rootedness in
reason and understanding; this is not the case
with afflictive emotions like anger and hatred. On
top of that, all these positive states of mind have
the quality that you can enhance their capacity
and increase their potential to a limitless degree, if
you regularly practice them through training and
constant familiarity ...”
I interrupted, “Can you explain a bit more
what you mean by the positive states of mind
having a ‘valid basis,’ and the negative states of
mind having ‘no valid basis’?”
He clarified, “Well, for example, compassion
is considered a positive emotion. In generating
compassion, you start by recognizing that you do
not want suffering and that you have a right to

 have happiness. This can be verified or validated
by your own experience. You then recognize that
other people, just like yourself, also do not want
to suffer and they have the right to have
happiness. This becomes the basis of your
beginning to generate compassion.
“Essentially, there are two kinds of emotions
or states of mind: positive and negative. One way
of categorizing these emotions is in terms of
understanding that the positive emotions are
those which can be justified, and the negative
emotions are those which cannot be justified. For
instance, earlier we discussed the topic of desire,
how there can be positive desires and negative
desires. Desire for one’s basic necessities to be
met is a positive kind of desire. It is justifiable. It
is based on the fact that we all exist and have the
right to survive. And in order to survive, there are

 certain things that we require, certain needs that
have to be met. So that kind of desire has a valid
foundation. And, as we discussed, there are
other types of desire that are negative, like
excessive desire and greed. Those kinds of
desires are not based on valid reasons, and often
just create trouble and complicate one’s life.
Those kinds of desires are simply based on a
feeling of discontentment, of wanting more, even
though the things we want aren’t really necessary.
Those kinds of desires have no solid reasons
behind them. So, in this way we can say that the
positive emotions have a firm and valid
foundation, and the negative emotions lack this
valid foundation.”

 The Dalai Lama continued his examination of the
human mind, dissecting the workings of the mind
with the same scrutiny that a botanist might use in
classifying species of rare flowers.
“Now this brings us to the second premise on
which we base the claim that our negative
emotions can be rooted out and eliminated. This
premise is based on the fact that our positive
states of mind can act as antidotes to our
negative tendencies and delusory states of
mind. So, the second premise is that as you
enhance the capacity of these antidotal
factors, the greater their force, the more you
will be able to reduce the force of the mental
and emotional afflictions, the more you will be
able to reduce the influences and effects of these

 things.
“When talking about eliminating negative
states of mind, there is one point that should be
born in mind. Within Buddhist practice, the
cultivation of certain specific positive mental
qualities such as patience, tolerance, kindness,
and so on can act as specific antidotes to
negative states of mind such as anger, hatred, and
attachment. Applying antidotes such as love and
compassion can significantly reduce the degree or
influence of the mental and emotional afflictions,
but since they seek to eliminate only certain
specific or individual afflictive emotions, in some
sense they can be seen as only partial measures.
These afflictive emotions, such as attachment and
hatred, are ultimately rooted in ignorance—
misconception of the true nature of reality.
Therefore, there seems to be a consensus among

 all Buddhist traditions that in order to fully
overcome all of these negative tendencies, one
must apply the antidote to ignorance—the
‘Wisdom factor. ’This is indispensable. The
‘Wisdom factor’ involves generating insight into
the true nature of reality.
“So, within the Buddhist tradition, we not only
have specific antidotes for specific states of mind,
for example, patience and tolerance act as
specific antidotes to anger and hatred, but we
also have a general antidote—insight into the
ultimate nature of reality—that acts as an antidote
to all of the negative states of mind. It is similar
to getting rid of a poisonous plant: you can
eliminate the harmful effects by cutting off the
specific branches and leaves, or you can
eliminate the entire plant by going to the root and
uprooting it.”

 Concluding his discussion about the possibility of
eliminating our negative mental states, the Dalai
Lama explained, “The third premise is that the
essential nature of mind is pure. It is based on the
belief that the underlying basic subtle
consciousness is untainted by the negative
emotions. Its nature is pure, a state which is
referred to as the ‘mind of Clear Light.’ That
basic nature of the mind is also called Buddha
Nature. So, since the negative emotions are not
an intrinsic part of this Buddha Nature, there is a
possibility to eliminate them and purify the mind.
“So it is on these three premises that

 Buddhism accepts that the mental and emotional
afflictions ultimately can be eliminated through
deliberately cultivating antidotal forces like love,
compassion, tolerance, and forgiveness, and
through various practices such as meditation.”
The idea that the underlying nature of the mind
is pure and we have the capacity to completely
eliminate our negative patterns of thinking was a
topic that I had heard the Dalai Lama speak of
before. He had compared the mind to a glass of
muddy water; the afflictive mental states were
like the “impurities” or the mud, which could be
removed to reveal the underlying “pure’ nature of
the water. This seemed a little abstract, so
moving on to more practical concerns, I
interrupted.
“Let’s say that one accepts the possibility of
eliminating one’s negative emotions, and even

 begins to take steps in that direction. From our
discussions, however, I sense that it would take
tremendous effort to eradicate this dark side—
tremendous study, contemplation, constant
application of antidotal factors, intensive
meditation practices, and so on. That might be
appropriate for a monk or someone who can
devote a lot of time and attention to these
practices. But what about an ordinary person,
with a family and so on, who may not have the
time or opportunity to practice these intensive
techniques? For them, wouldn’t it be more
appropriate to simply try to control their afflictive
emotions, to learn to live with them and manage
them properly, rather than to try to completely
eradicate them? It’s like patients with diabetes.
They may not have the means of a complete
cure, but by watching their diet, taking insulin,

 and so on, they can control the disease and
prevent the symptoms and the negative sequelae
of the disease.”
“Yes, that’s the way!” he enthusiastically
responded. “I agree with you. Whatever steps,
however small, one can take toward learning to
reduce the influence of the negative emotions can
be very helpful. It can definitely help one live a
happier and more satisfying life. However, it is
also possible for a layperson to attain high levels
of spiritual realization—someone who has a job,
a family, a sexual relationship with one’s spouse,
and so on. And not only that, but there have been
people who didn’t start serious practice until later
in life, when they were in their forties, fifties, or
even eighties, and yet they were able to become
great highly realized masters.”
“Have you personally met many individuals

 who you feel may have achieved these high
states?” I inquired.
“I think that’s very, very difficult to judge. I
think that true sincere practitioners never show
off these things.” He laughed.

Many in the West turn to religious beliefs as a
source of happiness, yet the Dalai Lama’s
approach is fundamentally different from many
Western religions in that it relies more heavily on
reasoning and training the mind than on faith. In
some respects, the Dalai Lama’s approach
resembles a mind science, a system that one
could apply in much the same way as people
utilize psychotherapy. But what the Dalai Lama

 suggests goes further. While we’re used to the
idea of using psychotherapeutic techniques such
as behavior therapy to attack specific bad habits
—smoking, drinking, temper flares—we are not
accustomed to cultivating positive attributes—
love, compassion, patience, generosity—as
weapons against all negative emotions and mental
states. The Dalai Lama’s method for achieving
happiness is based on the revolutionary idea that
negative mental states are not an intrinsic part of
our minds; they are transient obstacles that
obstruct the expression of our underlying natural
state of joy and happiness.
Most traditional schools of Western
psychotherapy tend to focus on adjusting to
one’s neurosis rather than a complete overhaul of
one’s entire outlook. They explore the
individual’s personal history, relationships, day-

 to-day experiences (including dreams and
fantasies), and even the relationship with the
therapist in an attempt to resolve the patient’s
internal conflicts, unconscious motives, and
psychological dynamics that may be contributing
to his or her problems and unhappiness. The goal
is to achieve healthier coping strategies,
adjustment, and amelioration of symptoms, rather
than directly training the mind to be happy.
The most distinguishing feature of the Dalai
Lama’s method of training the mind involves the
idea that positive states of mind can act as
direct antidotes to negative states of mind. In
looking for parallels to this approach in modern
behavioral science, cognitive therapy perhaps
comes closest. This form of psychotherapy has
become increasingly popular over the past few
decades and has been proven to be very

 effective in treating a wide variety of common
problems, particularly mood disorders such as
depression and anxiety. Modern cognitive
therapy, developed by psychotherapists such as
Dr. Albert Ellis and Dr. Aaron Beck, is based on
the idea that our upsetting emotions and
maladaptive behaviors are caused by distortions
in thinking and irrational beliefs. The therapy
focuses on helping the patient systematically
identify, examine, and correct these distortions in
thinking. The corrective thoughts, in a sense,
become an antidote to the distorted thinking
patterns that are the source of the patient’s
suffering.
For example, a person is rejected by another
and responds with excessive feelings of hurt. The
cognitive therapist first helps the person identify
the underlying irrational belief: for example, “I

 must be loved and approved of by almost every
significant person in my life at all times, or if not
it’s horrible and I’m unworthy.” The therapist
then presents the person with evidence that
challenges this unrealistic belief. Although this
approach may seem superficial, many studies
have shown that cognitive therapy works. In
depression, for instance, cognitive therapists
argue that it is one’s negative self-defeating
thoughts that underlie the depression. In much the
same way that Buddhists view all afflictive
emotions as distorted, cognitive therapists view
these negative depression-generating thoughts as
“essentially distorted.” In depression, thinking can
become distorted by viewing events in all-ornothing terms or overgen eralizing (e.g., if you
lose a job or fail a class, you automatically think,
“I’m a total failure!”) or by selectively perceiving

 only certain events (e.g., three good things and
two bad things may happen in one day, but the
depressed person ignores the good and focuses
only on the bad). So in treating the depression,
with the help of the therapist the patient is
encouraged to monitor the automatic arising of
negative thoughts (e.g., “I’m completely
worthless”) and actively correct these distorted
thoughts by gathering information and evidence
that contradict or disprove it (e.g., “I have
worked hard to raise two children,” “I have a
talent for singing,” “I have been a good friend,” “I
have held down a difficult job,” etc.).
Investigators have proven that by replacing these
distorted modes of thinking with accurate
information, one can bring about a change in
one’s feelings and improve one’s mood.
The very fact that we can change our

 emotions and counteract negative thoughts by
applying alternative ways of thinking lends
support to the Dalai Lama’s position that we can
overcome our negative mental states through the
application of the “antidotes,” or the
corresponding positive mental states. And when
this fact is combined with recent scientific
evidence that we can change the structure and
function of the brain by cultivating new thoughts,
then the idea that we can achieve happiness
through training of the mind seems a very real
possibility.

 Chapter 13

DEALING WITH ANGER AND
HATRED

If one comes across a person who has been shot by

 an arrow, one does
not spend time wondering about where the arrow
came from, or the
caste of the individual who shot it, or analyzing what
type of wood the
shaft is made of, or the manner in which the
arrowhead was fashioned.
Rather, one should focus on immediately pulling out
the arrow.
—Shakyamuni, the Buddha

We turn now to some of the “arrows,” the
negative states of mind that destroy our
happiness, and their corresponding antidotes. All

 negative mental states act as obstacles to our
happiness, but we begin with anger, which seems
to be one of the biggest blocks. It is described by
the Stoic philosopher Seneca as “the most
hideous and frenzied of all the emotions.” The
destructive effects of anger and hatred have been
well documented by recent scientific studies. Of
course, one doesn’t need scientific evidence to
realize how these emotions can cloud our
judgment, cause feelings of extreme discomfort,
or wreak havoc in our personal relationships.
Our personal experience can tell us that. But in
recent years, great inroads have been made in
documenting the harmful physical effects of anger
and hostility. Dozens of studies have shown these
emotions to be a significant cause of disease and
premature death. Investigators such as Dr.
Redford Williams at Duke University and Dr.

 Robert Sapolsky at Stanford University have
conducted studies that demonstrate that anger,
rage, and hostility are particularly damaging to the
cardiovascular system. So much evidence has
mounted about the harmful effects of hostility, in
fact, that it is now considered a major risk factor
in heart disease, at least equal to, or perhaps
greater than, the traditionally recognized risk
factors such as high cholesterol or high blood
pressure.
So, once we accept the harmful effects of
anger and hatred, the next question becomes:
how do we overcome it?
On my first day as a psychiatric consultant to
a treatment facility, I was being shown to my new
office by a staff member when I heard bloodcurdling screams reverberating down the hall ...
“I’m angry...”

 “Louder!”
“I’M ANGRY!”
“LOUDER! SHOW IT TO ME. LET ME
SEE IT!”
“I’M ANGRY!! I’M ANGRY!! I HATE
YOU!!! I HATE YOU!!”
It was truly frightening. I remarked to the staff
member that it sounded as if there was a crisis
that needed urgent attention.
“Don’t worry about it,” she laughed. “They’re
just having a group therapy session down the hall
—helping the patient get in touch with her anger.”
Later that day, I met with the patient privately.
She appeared drained.
“I feel so relaxed,” she said, “that therapy
session really worked. I feel as if I’ve gotten all
my anger out.”
In our next session the following day,

 however, the patient reported, “Well, I guess I
didn’t get all my anger out after all. Right after I
left here yesterday, as I was pulling out of the
parking lot some jerk almost cut me off ... and I
was furious! And I kept cursing that jerk under
my breath all the way home. I guess I still need a
few more of those anger sessions to get the rest
of it out.”

In setting out to conquer anger and hatred, the
Dalai Lama begins by investigating the nature of
these destructive emotions.
“Generally speaking,” he explained, “there are

 many different kinds of afflictive or negative
emotions, such as conceit, arrogance, jealousy,
desire, lust, closed-mindedness, and so on. But
out of all these, hatred and anger are considered
to be the greatest evils because they are the
greatest obstacles to developing compassion and
altruism, and they destroy one’s virtue and
calmness of mind.
“In thinking about anger, there can be two
types. One type of anger can be positive. This
would be mainly due to one’s motivation. There
can be some anger that is motivated by
compassion or a sense of responsibility. Where
anger is motivated by compassion, it can be used
as an impetus or a catalyst for a positive action.
Under these circumstances, a human emotion like
anger can act as a force to bring about swift
action. It creates a kind of energy that enables an

 individual to act quickly and decisively. It can be
a powerful motivating factor. So, sometimes that
kind of anger can be positive. All too often,
however, even though that kind of anger can act
as a kind of protector and bring one extra
energy, that energy is also blind, so it is uncertain
whether it will become constructive or destructive
in the end.
“So, even though under rare circumstances
some kinds of anger can be positive, generally
speaking, anger leads to ill feeling and hatred.
And, as far as hatred is concerned, it is never
positive. It has no benefit at all. It is always totally
negative.
“We cannot overcome anger and hatred
simply by suppressing them. We need to actively
cultivate the antidotes to hatred: patience and
tolerance. Following the model that we spoke of

 earlier, in order for you to be able to successfully
cultivate patience and tolerance you need to
generate enthusiasm, a strong desire to seek it.
The stronger your enthusiasm, the greater your
ability to withstand the hardships that you
encounter in the process. When you are engaged
in the practice of patience and tolerance, in
reality, what is happening is you are engaged in a
combat with hatred and anger. Since it is a
situation of combat, you seek victory, but you
also have to be prepared for the possibility of
losing that battle. So while you are engaged in
combat, you should not lose sight of the fact that
in the process, you will confront many problems.
You should have the ability to withstand these
hardships. Someone who gains victory over
hatred and anger through such an arduous
process is a true hero.

 “It is with this in mind that we generate this
strong enthusiasm. Enthusiasm results from
learning about and reflecting upon the beneficial
effects of tolerance and patience, and the
destructive and negative effects of anger and
hatred. And that very act, that very realization in
itself, will create an affinity towards feelings of
tolerance and patience and make you feel more
cautious and wary of angry and hateful thoughts.
Usually, we don’t bother much about anger or
hatred, so it just comes. But once we develop a
cautious attitude towards these emotions, that
reluctant attitude itself can act as a preventative
measure against anger or hatred.
“The destructive effects of hatred are very
visible, very obvious and immediate. For
example, when a very strong or forceful thought
of hatred arises within you, at that very instant, it

 totally overwhelms you and destroys your peace
of mind; your presence of mind disappears
completely. When such intense anger and hatred
arises, it obliterates the best part of your brain,
which is the ability to judge between right and
wrong, and the long-term and short-term
consequences of your actions. Your power of
judgment becomes totally inoperable; it can no
longer function. It is almost like you have become
insane. So, this anger and hatred tends to throw
you into a state of confusion, which just serves to
make your problems and difficulties so much
worse.
“Even at the physical level, hatred brings
about a very ugly, unpleasant physical
transformation of the individual. At the very
instant when strong feelings of anger or hatred
arise, no matter how hard the person tries to

 pretend or adopt a dignified pose, it is very
obvious that the person’s face looks contorted
and ugly. There is a very unpleasant expression,
and the person gives out a very hostile vibration.
Other people can sense it. It is almost as if they
can feel steam coming out of that person’s body.
So much so, that not only are human beings
capable of sensing it, but even animals, pets,
would try to avoid the person at that instant.
Also, when a person harbors hateful thoughts,
they tend to collect inside the person, and this
can cause things like loss of appetite, loss of
sleep, and certainly make the person feel more
tense and uptight.
“For reasons such as these, hatred is
compared to an enemy. This internal enemy, this
inner enemy, has no other function than causing
us harm. It is our true enemy, our ultimate enemy.

 It has no other function than simply destroying us,
both in the immediate term and in the long term.
“This is very different from an ordinary
enemy. Although an ordinary enemy, a person
whom we regard as an enemy, may engage in
activities that are harmful to us, at least he or she
has other functions; that person has got to eat,
and that person has got to sleep. So he or she
has many other functions and therefore cannot
devote twenty-four hours a day of his or her
existence to this project of destroying us. On the
other hand, hatred has no other function, no other
purpose, than destroying us. So, by realizing this
fact, we should resolve that we will never give an
opportunity for this enemy, hatred, to arise within
us.”
“In dealing with anger, what do you think
about some of the methods of Western

 psychotherapy, which encourage expressing
one’s anger?”
“Here, I think we have to understand that
there may be different situations,” the Dalai Lama
explained. “In some cases, people harbor strong
feelings of anger and hurt based on something
done to them in the past, an abuse or whatever,
and that feeling is kept bottled up. There is a
Tibetan expression that says that if there is any
sickness in the conch shell, you can clear it by
blowing it out. In other words, if anything is
blocking the conch shell, just blow it out, and it
will be clear. So similarly here, it is possible to
imagine a situation in which, due to the bottling up
of certain emotions or certain feelings of anger, it
may be better to just let it out and express it.
“However, I believe that generally speaking,
anger and hatred are the type of emotions which,

 if you leave them unchecked or unattended, tend
to aggravate and keep on increasing. If you
simply get more and more used to letting them
happen and just keep expressing them, this
usually results in their growth, not their reduction.
So, I feel that the more you adopt a cautious
attitude and actively try to reduce the level of
their force, the better it is.”
“So, if you feel that expressing or releasing
our anger isn’t the answer, then what is?” I
inquired.
“Now, first of all, feelings of anger and hatred
arise from a mind that is troubled by
dissatisfaction and discontent. So you can
prepare ahead of time by constantly working
toward building inner contentment and cultivating
kindness and compassion. This brings about a
certain calmness of mind that can help prevent

 anger from arising in the first place. And then
when a situation does arise that makes you angry,
you should directly confront your anger and
analyze it. Investigate what factors have given rise
to that particular instance of anger or hatred.
Then, analyze further, seeing whether it is an
appropriate response and especially whether it is
constructive or destructive. And you make an
effort to exert a certain inner discipline and
restraint, actively combating it by applying the
antidotes: counteracting these negative emotions
with thoughts of patience and tolerance.”
The Dalai Lama paused, then with his
customary pragmatism, added, “Of course, in
working towards overcoming anger and hatred,
at the initial stage you may still experience these
negative emotions. But there are different levels;
if it’s a mild degree of anger, then at that moment

 you can attempt to directly confront it and
combat it. However, if it’s a very strong negative
emotion that develops, then, at that moment, it
might be very difficult to challenge or to face it. If
that is the case, then at that moment it may be
best to simply try to forget about it. Think of
something else. Once your mind is a little bit
calmed down, then you can analyze; you can
reason.” In other words, I reflected, he was
saying, “Take a time out.”
He went on. “In seeking to eliminate anger
and hatred, the intentional cultivation of patience
and tolerance is indispensable. You could
conceive of the value and importance of patience
and tolerance in these terms: Insofar as the
destructive effects of angry and hateful thoughts
are concerned, you cannot get protection from
these from wealth. Even if you are a millionaire,

 you are still subject to the destructive effects of
anger and hatred. Nor can education alone give
you a guarantee that you will be protected from
these effects. Similarly, the law cannot give you
such guarantees or protection. Even nuclear
weapons, no matter how sophisticated the
defense system may be, cannot give you the
protection or defense from these effects ...”
The Dalai Lama paused to gather momentum,
then concluded in a clear, firm voice, “The only
factor that can give you refuge or protection
from the destructive effects of anger and
hatred is your practice of tolerance and
patience.”

 Once again, the Dalai Lama’s traditional wisdom
is completely consistent with the scientific data.
Dr. Dolf Zillmann at the University of Alabama
has conducted experiments demonstrating that
angry thoughts tend to create a state of
physiological arousal that makes us even more
prone to anger. Anger builds on anger, and as
our state of arousal increases, we are more easily
triggered by anger-provoking environmental
stimuli.
If left unchecked, anger tends to escalate. So,
how do we go about diffusing our anger? As the
Dalai Lama suggests, giving vent to anger and
rage has very limited benefits. The therapeutic
expression of anger as a means of catharsis
seems to have originated from Freud’s theories
of emotion, which he saw as operating on a
hydraulic model: when pressure builds, it must be

 released. The idea of getting rid of our anger by
giving vent to it has some dramatic appeal and in
a way might even sound like fun, but the problem
is that this method simply does not work. Many
studies over the past four decades have
consistently shown that the verbal and physical
expression of our anger does nothing to dispel it
and just makes things worse. Dr. Aaron
Siegman, a psychologist and anger researcher at
the University of Maryland, believes, for instance,
that it is just this kind of repeated expression of
anger and rage that triggers the internal arousal
systems and biochemical responses that are most
likely to cause damage to our arteries.
While giving vent to our anger clearly isn’t the
answer, neither is ignoring our anger or
pretending it isn’t there. As we discussed in Part
III, avoidance of our problems does not make

 them go away. So, what’s the best approach?
Interestingly, the consensus among modern anger
researchers such as Dr. Zillmann and Dr.
Williams, is that methods similar to the Dalai
Lama’s appear to be most effective. Since
general stress lowers the threshold for what may
trigger anger, the first step is preventative:
cultivating an inner contentment and calmer state
of mind, as recommended by the Dalai Lama,
can definitely help. And when anger does occur,
research has shown that actively challenging,
logically analyzing, and reappraising the thoughts
that trigger the anger can help dissipate it. There
is also experimental evidence suggesting that the
techniques that we discussed earlier, such as
shifting perspective or looking at different angles
of a situation, can also be very effective. Of
course, these things are often easier to do at

 lower or moderate levels of anger, so practicing
early intervention before thoughts of anger and
hatred escalate can be an important factor.

Because of their vast importance in overcoming
anger and hatred, the Dalai Lama spoke in some
detail on the meaning and value of patience and
tolerance.
“In our day-to-day life experiences, tolerance
and patience have great benefits. For instance,
developing them will allow us to sustain and
maintain our presence of mind. So if an individual
possesses this capacity of tolerance and patience,
then, even in spite of living in a very tense
environment, which is very frantic and stressful,

 so long as the person has tolerance and patience,
the person’s calmness and peace of mind will not
be disturbed.
“Another benefit of responding to difficult
situations with patience rather than giving in to
anger is that you protect yourself from potential
undesirable consequences that might come about
if you reacted with anger. If you respond to
situations with anger and hatred, not only does it
not protect you from the injury or harm that has
already been done to you—the injury and harm
has already taken place—but on top of that, you
create an additional cause for your own suffering
in the future. However, if you respond to an
injury with patience and tolerance, then although
you may face temporary discomfort and hurt, you
will still avoid the potentially dangerous long-term
consequences. By sacrificing small things, by

 putting up with small problems or hardships, you
will be able to forgo experiences or sufferings
that can be much more enormous in the future.
To illustrate, if a convicted prisoner could save
his life by sacrificing his arm as a punishment,
wouldn’t that person feel grateful for the
opportunity? By putting up with that pain and
suffering of having an arm cut off, the person
would be saving himself or herself from death,
which is a greater suffering.”
“To the Western mind,” I observed, “patience
and tolerance are certainly considered virtues,
but when you are directly beset by others, when
someone is actively harming you, responding with
‘patience and tolerance’ seems to have a flavor
of weakness, of passivity.”
Shaking his head in disagreement, the Dalai
Lama said, “Since patience or tolerance comes

 from an ability to remain firm and steadfast and
not be overwhelmed by the adverse situations or
conditions that one faces, one should not see
tolerance or patience as a sign of weakness, or
giving in, but rather as a sign of strength, coming
from a deep ability to remain firm. Responding to
a trying situation with patience and tolerance
rather than reacting with anger and hatred
involves active restraint, which comes from a
strong, self-disciplined mind.
“Of course, in discussing the concept of
patience, as in most other things, there can be
positive and negative kinds of patience.
Impatience isn’t always bad. For instance, it can
help you take action to get things done. Even in
your daily chores, like cleaning your room, if you
have too much patience, you might move too
slowly and get little done. Or, impatience to gain

 world peace—that certainly can be positive. But
in situations that are difficult and challenging,
patience helps maintain your willpower and can
sustain you.”
Becoming increasingly animated as he moved
more deeply into his investigation of the meaning
of patience, the Dalai Lama added, “I think that
there is a very close connection between humility
and patience. Humility involves having the
capacity to take a more confrontational stance,
having the capacity to retaliate if you wish, yet
deliberately deciding not to do so. That is what I
would call genuine humility. I think that true
tolerance or patience has a component or
element of self-discipline and restraint—the
realization that you could have acted otherwise,
you could have adopted a more aggressive
approach, but decided not to do so. On the other

 hand, being forced to adopt a certain passive
response out of a feeling of helplessness or
incapacitation—that I wouldn’t call genuine
humility. That may be a kind of meekness, but it
isn’t genuine tolerance.
“Now when we talk about how we should
develop tolerance towards those who harm us,
we should not misunderstand this to mean that
we should just meekly accept whatever is done
against us.” The Dalai Lama paused, then
laughed. “Rather, if necessary, the best, the
wisest course, might be to simply run away—run
miles away!”
“You can’t always avoid being harmed by
running away ...”
“Yes, that’s true,” he replied. “Sometimes,
you may encounter situations that require strong
countermeasures. I believe, however, that you

 can take a strong stand and even take strong
countermeasures out of a feeling of compassion,
or a sense of concern for the other, rather than
out of anger. One of the reasons why there is a
need to adopt a very strong countermeasure
against someone is that if you let it pass—
whatever the harm or the crime that is being
perpetrated against you—then there is a danger
of that person’s habituating in a very negative
way, which, in reality, will cause that individual’s
own downfall and is very destructive in the long
run for the individual himself or herself. Therefore
a strong countermeasure is necessary, but with
this thought in mind, you can do it out of
compassion and concern for that individual. For
example, so far as our own dealings with China
are concerned, even if there is a likelihood of
some feeling of hatred arising, we deliberately

 check ourselves and try to reduce that, we try to
consciously develop a feeling of compassion
towards the Chinese. And I think that
countermeasures can ultimately be more effective
without feelings of anger and hatred.
“Now, we’ve explored methods of
developing patience and tolerance and letting go
of anger and hatred, methods such as using
reasoning to analyze the situation, adopting a
wider perspective, and looking at other angles of
a situation. An end result, or a product of
patience and tolerance, is forgiveness. When
you are truly patient and tolerant, then
forgiveness comes naturally.
“Although you may have experienced many
negative events in the past, with the development
of patience and tolerance it is possible to let go of
your sense of anger and resentment. If you

 analyze the situation, you’ll realize that the past is
past, so there is no use continuing to feel anger
and hatred, which do not change the situation but
just cause a disturbance within your mind and
cause your continued unhappiness. Of course,
you may still remember the events. Forgetting
and forgiving are two different things. There’s
nothing wrong with simply remembering those
negative events; if you have a sharp mind, you’ll
always remember,” he laughed. “I think the
Buddha remembered everything. But with the
development of patience and tolerance, it’s
possible to let go of the negative feelings
associated with the events.”

 MEDITATIONS ON ANGER

In many of these discussions, the Dalai Lama’s
primary method of overcoming anger and hatred
involved the use of reasoning and analysis to
investigate the causes of anger, to combat these
harmful mental states through understanding. In a
sense, this approach can be seen as using logic to
neutralize anger and hatred and to cultivate the
antidotes of patience and tolerance. But that
wasn’t his only technique. In his public talks he
supplemented his discussion by presenting
instruction on these two simple yet effective
meditations to help overcome anger.

 Meditation on Anger: Exercise 1

“Let us imagine a scenario in which someone
who you know very well, someone who is close
or dear to you, is in a situation in which he or she
loses his or her temper. You can imagine this
occurring either in a very acrimonious relationship
or in a situation in which something personally
upsetting is happening. The person is so angry
that he or she has lost all his or her mental
composure, creating very negative vibrations,
even going to the extent of beating himself or
herself up or breaking things.
“Then, reflect upon the immediate effects of
the person’s rage. You’ll see a physical
transformation happening to that person. This

 person whom you feel close to, whom you like,
the very sight of whom gave you pleasure in the
past, now turns into this ugly person, even
physically speaking. The reason why I think you
should visualize this happening to someone else is
because it is easier to see the faults of others than
to see your own faults. So, using your
imagination, do this meditation and visualization
for a few minutes.
“At the end of that visualization, analyze the
situation and relate the circumstances to your
own experience. See that you yourself have been
in this state many times. Resolve that ‘I shall
never let myself fall under the sway of such
intense anger and hatred, because if I do that, I
will be in the same position. I will also suffer all
these consequences, lose my peace of mind, lose
my composure, assume this ugly physical

 appearance,’ and so on. So once you make that
decision, then for the last few minutes of the
meditation focus your mind on that conclusion;
without further analysis, simply let your mind
remain on your resolution not to fall under the
influence of anger and hatred.”

 Meditation on Anger: Exercise 2

“Let us do another meditation using visualization.
Begin by visualizing someone whom you dislike,
someone who annoys you, causes a lot of
problems for you, or gets on your nerves. Then,
imagine a scenario in which the person irritates
you, or does something that offends you or
annoys you. And, in your imagination, when you
visualize this, let your natural response follow;
just let it flow naturally. Then see how you feel,
see whether that causes the rate of your
heartbeat to go up, and so on. Examine whether
you are comfortable or uncomfortable; see if you
immediately become more peaceful or if you
develop an uncomfortable mental feeling. Judge

 for yourself; investigate. So for a few minutes,
three or four minutes perhaps, judge, and
experiment. And then at the end of your
investigation, if you discover that ‘Yes, it is of no
use to allow that irritation to develop.
Immediately I lose my peace of mind,’ then say
to yourself, ‘In the future, I will never do that.’
Develop that determination. Finally, for the last
few minutes of the exercise, place your mind
single-pointedly upon that conclusion or
determination. So that’s the meditation.”
The Dalai Lama paused for a moment, then
looking around the room of sincere students
preparing to practice this meditation, he laughed,
and added, “I think if I had the cognitive faculty,
ability, or the clear awareness to be able to read
other people’s minds, then there would be a
great spectacle here!”

 There was a ripple of laughter in the audience,
which quickly died down as his listeners started
the meditation, beginning the serious business of
doing battle with their anger.

 Chapter 14

DEALING WITH ANXIETY AND
BUILDING SELF-ESTEEM

It is estimated that in the course of a lifetime at
least one in four Americans will suffer from a
debilitating degree of anxiety or worry severe

 enough to meet the criteria for the medical
diagnosis of an anxiety disorder. But even those
who never suffer from a pathological or disabling
state of anxiety will, at one time or another,
experience excessive levels of worry and anxiety
that serve no useful purpose and do nothing but
undermine their happiness and interfere with their
ability to accomplish their goals.
The human brain is equipped with an
elaborate system designed to register the
emotions of fear and worry. This system serves
an important function—it mobilizes us to respond
to danger by setting in motion a complex
sequence of biochemical and physiological
events. The adaptive side of worry is that it
allows us to anticipate danger and take
preventative action. So, some types of fears and
a certain amount of worry can be healthy.

 However, feelings of fear and anxiety can persist
and even escalate in the absence of an authentic
threat, and when these emotions grow out of
proportion to any real danger they become
maladaptive. Excessive anxiety and worry can,
like anger and hatred, have devastating effects on
the mind and body, becoming the source of much
emotional suffering and even physical illness.
On a mental level, chronic anxiety can impair
judgment, increase irritability, and hinder one’s
overall effectiveness. It can also lead to physical
problems including depressed immune function,
heart disease, gastrointestinal disorders, fatigue,
and muscle tension and pain. Anxiety disorders,
for instance, have even been shown to cause
stunted growth in adolescent girls.
In seeking strategies to deal with anxiety, we
must first recognize, as the Dalai Lama will point

 out, that there may be many factors contributing
to the experience of anxiety. In some cases, there
may be a strong biological component. Some
people seem to have a certain neurological
vulnerability to experiencing states of worry and
anxiety. Scientists have recently discovered a
gene that is linked to people who are prone to
anxiety and negative thinking. Not all cases of
toxic worry are genetic in origin, however, and
there is little doubt that learning and conditioning
play a major role in its etiology.
But, regardless of whether our anxiety is
predominantly physical or psychological in origin,
the good news is that there is something we can
do about it. In the most severe cases of anxiety,
medication can be a useful part of the treatment
regimen. But most of us who are troubled by
nagging day-to-day worries and anxiety will not

 need pharmacological intervention. Experts in the
field of anxiety management generally feel that a
multidimensional approach is best. This would
include first ruling out an underlying medical
condition as the cause of our anxiety. Working
on improving our physical health through proper
diet and exercise can also be helpful. And, as the
Dalai Lama has emphasized, cultivating
compassion and deepening our connection with
others can promote good mental hygiene and
help combat anxiety states.
In searching for practical strategies to
overcome anxiety, however, there is one
technique that stands out as particularly effective:
cognitive intervention. This is one of the main
methods used by the Dalai Lama to overcome
daily worries and anxiety. Applying the same
procedure used with anger and hatred, this

 technique involves actively challenging the
anxiety-generating thoughts and replacing them
with well-reasoned positive thoughts and
attitudes.

Because of the pervasiveness of anxiety in our
culture, I was eager to bring up the subject with
the Dalai Lama and learn how he deals with it.
His schedule was particularly busy that day, and I
could feel my own anxiety level rising as,
moments before our interview, I was informed by
his secretary that we would have to cut our
conversation short. Feeling pressed for time and
worrying that we wouldn’t be able to address all
the topics I wanted to discuss, I sat down quickly

 and began, reverting to my intermittent tendency
to try to elicit simplistic answers from him.
“You know, fear and anxiety can be a major
obstacle to achieving our goals, whether they are
external goals or inner growth. In psychiatry we
have various methods of dealing with these
things, but I’m curious, from your standpoint,
what’s the best way to overcome fear and
anxiety?”
Resisting my invitation to oversimplify the
matter, the Dalai Lama answered with his
characteristically thorough approach.
“In dealing with fear, I think that we first need
to recognize that there are many different types of
fear. Some kinds of fear are very genuine, based
on valid reasons, fear of violence or fear of
bloodshed, for example. We can see that these
things are very bad. Then there’s fear about the

 long-term negative consequences of our negative
actions, fear of suffering, fear of our negative
emotions such as hatred. I think these are the
right kinds of fears; having these kinds of fears
bring us onto the right path, bring us closer to
becoming a warmhearted person.” He stopped
to reflect, then mused, “Although in a sense these
are kinds of fears, I think perhaps that there may
be some difference between fearing these things
and the mind’s seeing the destructive nature of
these things ...”
He ceased speaking again for several
moments, and appeared to be deliberating, while
I stole furtive glances at my watch. Clearly he
didn’t feel the same time crunch that I did.
Finally, he continued speaking in a leisurely
manner.
“On the other hand, some kinds of fears are

 our own mental creations. These fears may be
based mainly on mental projection. For example,
there are very childish fears,” he laughed, “like
when we were young and passed through a dark
place, especially some of the dark rooms in the
Potala,5 and became afraid—that was based
completely on mental projection. Or, when I was
young, the sweepers and people looking after me
always warned me that there was an owl that
caught young children and consumed them!” the
Dalai Lama laughed even harder. “And I really
believed them!”
“There are other types of fear based on
mental projection,” he continued. “For example,
if you have negative feelings, because of your
own mental situation, you may project those
feelings onto another, who then appears as
someone negative and hostile. And as a result,

 you feel fear. That kind of fear, I think, is related
to hatred and comes about as a sort of mental
creation. So, in dealing with fear, you need to
first use your faculty of reasoning and try to
discover whether there is a valid basis for your
fear or not.”
I asked, “Well, rather than an intense or
focused fear of a specific individual or situation,
many of us are plagued by more of an ongoing
diffuse worry about a variety of day-to-day
problems. Do you have any suggestions about
how to handle that?”
Nodding his head, he replied, “One of the
approaches that I personally find useful to reduce
that kind of worry is to cultivate the thought: If
the situation or problem is such that it can be
remedied, then there is no need to worry
about it. In other words, if there is a solution or

 a way out of the difficulty, then one needn’t be
overwhelmed by it. The appropriate action is to
seek its solution. It is more sensible to spend the
energy focusing on the solution rather than
worrying about the problem. Alternatively, if
there is no way out, no solution, no Possibility
of resolution, then there is also no point in
being worried about it, because you can’t do
anything about it anyway. In that case, the
sooner you accept this fact, the easier it will be
on you. This formula, of course, implies directly
confronting the problem. Otherwise you won’t be
able to find out whether or not there is a
resolution to the problem.“
“What if thinking about that doesn’t help
alleviate your anxiety?”
“Well, you may need to reflect on these
thoughts a bit more and reinforce these ideas.

 Remind yourself of it repeatedly. Anyway, I think
that this approach can help reduce anxiety and
worry, but that doesn’t mean it always will work.
If you are dealing with ongoing anxiety, I think
you need to look at the specific situation. There
are different types of anxieties and different
causes. For example, some types of anxiety or
nervousness could have some biological causes;
for instance, some people tend to get sweaty
palms, which according to the Tibetan medical
system could indicate an imbalance of subtle
energy levels. Some types of anxiety, just like
some types of depression for instance, may have
biological roots, and for these medical treatment
may be useful. So in order to deal with the
anxiety effectively, you need to look at the kind it
is and the cause.
“So, just like fear, there can be different types

 of anxiety. For example, one type of anxiety,
which I think may be common, could involve fear
of appearing foolish in front of others or fear that
others might think badly of you ...”
“Have you ever experienced that kind of
anxiety or nervousness?” I interrupted.
The Dalai Lama broke into a robust laugh,
and without hesitation he responded, “Oh yes!”
“Can you give an example?”
He thought for a moment, then said, “Now,
for instance, in 1954 in China, on the first day of
meeting with Chairman Mao Zedong, and also
another occasion in meeting with Chou En-lai. In
those days I wasn’t fully aware of the proper
protocol and convention. The usual procedure
for a meeting was to start with some casual talk
and then proceed to the discussion of business.
But on that occasion I was so nervous that the

 moment I sat down, I just jumped right into
business!” The Dalai Lama laughed at the
memory. “I remember that afterwards my
translator, a Tibetan communist who was very
reliable and my great, great friend, looked at me
and started laughing and teasing me about it.
“I think that even these days, just before a
public talk or teachings are about to start, I
always feel a little bit of anxiety, so some of my
attendants usually say, ‘If that’s the case, then
why did you accept the invitation to give
teachings in the first place?’ ” He laughed again.
“So how do you personally deal with that
kind of anxiety?” I asked.
With a querulous and unaffected tone in his
voice he said quietly, “I don’t know ...” He
paused, and we sat in silence for a long time, as
once again he seemed to carefully consider and

 reflect. At last he said, “I think having proper
motivation and honesty are the keys to
overcoming those kinds of fear and anxiety. So, if
I am anxious before giving a talk, I’ll remind
myself that the main reason, the aim of giving the
lecture, is to be of at least some benefit to the
people, not for showing off my knowledge. So,
those points which I know, I’ll explain. Those
points which I do not understand properly—then
it doesn’t matter; I just say, ‘For me, this is
difficult.’ There’s no reason to hide or to pretend.
From that standpoint, with that motivation, I
don’t have to worry about appearing foolish or
care about what others think of me. So, I’ve
found that sincere motivation acts as an
antidote to reduce fear and anxiety.”
“Well, sometimes the anxiety involves more
than just appearing foolish in front of others. It’s

 more of a fear of failure, a feeling of being
incompetent ...” I reflected for a moment,
considering how much personal information to
reveal.
The Dalai Lama listened intently, silently
nodding as I spoke. I’m not sure what it was.
Maybe it was his attitude of sympathetic
understanding, but before I knew it, I had shifted
from discussing broad general issues to soliciting
his advice about dealing with my own fears and
anxieties.
“I don’t know ... sometimes with my patients
for instance ... some are very difficult to treat—
cases in which it isn’t a matter of making a clearcut diagnosis like depression or some other
illness that is easily remedied. There are some
patients with severe personality disorders, for
instance, who don’t respond to medication and

 have failed to make much progress in
psychotherapy despite my best efforts.
Sometimes I just don’t know what to do with
these people, how to help them. I can’t seem to
get a grasp on what’s going on with them. And it
makes me feel immobilized, sort of helpless,” I
complained. “It makes me feel incompetent, and
that really creates a certain kind of fear, of
anxiety.”
He listened solemnly, then asked in a kindly
voice, “Would you say that you’re able to help
70 percent of your patients?”
“At least that,” I replied.
Patting my hand gently, he said, “Then I think
that there’s no problem here. If you were able to
help only 30 percent of your patients, then I
might suggest that you consider another
profession. But I think you’re doing fine. In my

 case people also come to me for help. Many are
looking for miracles, for miraculous cures, and so
on, and of course I can’t help everybody. But I
think the main thing is motivation—to have a
sincere motivation to help. Then you just do the
best you can, and you don’t have to worry about
it.
“So, in my case also there are of course some
situations that are tremendously delicate or
serious, and such a heavy responsibility. I think
the worst is when people place too much trust or
belief in me, in circumstances in which some
things are beyond my capability. In such cases,
sometimes anxiety, of course, develops. Here,
once again, we return to the importance of
motivation. Then, I try to remind myself as far as
my own motivation is concerned, I am sincere,
and I tried my best. With a sincere motivation,

 one of compassion, even if I made a mistake or
failed, there is no cause for regret. For my part I
did my best. Then, you see, if I failed, it was
because the situation was beyond my best
efforts. So that sincere motivation removes fear
and gives you self-confidence. On the other
hand, if your underlying motivation is to cheat
someone, then if you fail, you really become
nervous. But if you cultivate a compassionate
motivation, if you fail, then there’s no regret.
“So, again and again, I think that proper
motivation can be a sort of protector, shielding
you against these feelings of fear and anxiety.
Motivation is so important. In fact all human
action can be seen in terms of movement, and the
mover behind all actions is one’s motivation. If
you develop a pure and sincere motivation, if you
are motivated by a wish to help on the basis of

 kindness, compassion, and respect, then you can
carry on any kind of work, in any field, and
function more effectively with less fear or worry,
not being afraid of what others think or whether
you ultimately will be successful in reaching your
goal. Even if you fail to achieve your goal, you
can feel good about having made the effort. But
with a bad motivation, people can praise you or
you can achieve goals, but you still will not be
happy.”

In discussing the antidotes to anxiety, the Dalai
Lama offers two remedies, each working on a
different level. The first involves actively
combating chronic rumination and worry by

 applying a counteractive thought: reminding
oneself, If there is a solution to the problem,
there is no need to worry. If there is no
solution, there is no sense in worrying either.
The second antidote is a more broadspectrum remedy. It involves the transformation
of one’s underlying motivation. There is an
interesting contrast between the Dalai Lama’s
approach to human motivation and that of
Western science and psychology. As we
previously discussed, researchers who have
studied human motivation have investigated
normal human motives, looking at both instinctual
and learned needs and drives. At this level, the
Dalai Lama has focused on developing and using
learned drives to enhance one’s “enthusiasm and
determination.” In some respects, this is similar to
the view of many conventional Western

 “motivation experts,” who also seek to boost
one’s enthusiasm and determination to
accomplish goals. But the difference is that the
Dalai Lama seeks to build determination and
enthusiasm to engage in more wholesome
behaviors and eliminate negative mental traits,
rather than emphasizing the achievement of
worldly success, money, or power. And perhaps
the most striking difference is that whereas the
“motivational speakers” are busy fanning the
flames of already existing motives for worldly
success, and the Western theorists are
preoccupied with categorizing standard human
motives, the Dalai Lama’s primary interest in
human motivation lies in resbaping and
changing one’s underlying motivation to one of
compassion and kindness.
In the Dalai Lama’s system of training the

 mind and achieving happiness, the closer one
gets to being motivated by altruism, the more
fearless one becomes in the face of even
extremely anxiety-provoking circumstances.
But the same principle can be applied in smaller
ways, even when one’s motivation is less than
completely altruistic. Standing back and simply
making sure that you mean no harm and that your
motivation is sincere can help reduce anxiety in
ordinary daily situations.
Not long after the above conversation with
the Dalai Lama, I had lunch with a group of
people that included one young man whom I had
not met before, a college student at a local
university. During lunch, someone asked how my
series of discussions with the Dalai Lama were
going, and I recounted the conversation about
overcoming anxiety. After quietly listening to me

 describe the idea of “sincere motivation as an
antidote to anxiety,” the student confided that he
had always been painfully shy and very anxious in
social situations. In thinking about how he might
apply this technique in overcoming his own
anxiety, the student muttered, “Well, all that’s
pretty interesting. But I guess the hard part is
always having this lofty motivation of kindness
and compassion.”
“I suppose that’s true,” I had to admit.
The general conversation turned to other
subjects, and we finished our lunch. I happened
to run into the same college student the following
week at the same restaurant.
Approaching me in a cheerful manner, he
said, “You remember we were talking about
motivation and anxiety the other day? Well, I
tried it out and it really works! There’s this girl

 who works at a department store in the mall
whom I’ve seen a lot of times; I’ve always
wanted to ask her out, but I don’t know her and
I’ve always felt too shy and anxious, so I’ve
never even talked to her. Well, the other day I
went in again, but this time I started thinking
about my motivation for asking her out. My
motivation, of course, is that I’d like to date her.
But behind that is just the wish that I could find
someone whom I can love and who will love me.
When I thought about it, I realized that there is
nothing wrong with that, that my motivation was
sincere; I didn’t wish any harm to her or myself,
but only good things. Just keeping that in mind,
and reminding myself of it a few times, seemed to
help somehow; it gave me the courage to strike
up a conversation with her. My heart was still
pounding, but I feel great that at least I was able

 to get up the nerve to speak with her.”
“I’m glad to hear that,” I said. “What
happened?”
“Well, as it turns out, she already has a steady
boyfriend. I was a bit disappointed, but it’s okay.
It just felt good that I was able to overcome my
shyness. And it made me realize that if I make
sure that there’s nothing wrong with my
motivation and keep that in mind, it could help
the next time I’m in the same situation.”

 HONESTY AS AN ANTIDOTE TO
LOW SELF-ESTEEM OR INFLATED
SELF-CONFIDENCE

A healthy sense of self-confidence is a critical
factor in achieving our goals. This holds true
whether our goal is to earn a college degree,
build a successful business, enjoy a satisfying
relationship, or train the mind to become happier.
Low self-confidence inhibits our efforts to move
ahead, to meet challenges, and even to take
some risks when necessary in the pursuit of our
objectives. Inflated self-confidence can be
equally hazardous. Those who suffer from an
exaggerated sense of their own abilities and

 accomplishments are continuously subject to
frustration, disappointment, and rage when reality
intrudes and the world doesn’t validate their
idealized view of themselves. And they are
always precariously close to sinking into
depression when they fail to live up to their own
idealized self-image. In addition, these
individuals’ grandiosity often leads to a sense of
entitlement and a kind of arrogance that distances
them from others and prevents emotionally
satisfying relationships. Finally, overestimating
their abilities can lead to taking dangerous risks.
As inspector Dirty Harry Callahan, in a
philosophical frame of mind, tells us in the film
Magnum Force (while watching the
overconfident villain blow himself up), “A man’s
gotta know his limitations.”
In the Western psychotherapeutic tradition,

 theorists have related both low and inflated selfconfidence to disturbances in people’s self-image
and have searched for the roots of these
disturbances in people’s early upbringing. Many
theorists see poor self-image and inflated selfimage as two sides of the same coin,
conceptualizing people’s inflated self-image, for
instance, as an unconscious defense against
underlying insecurities and negative feelings about
themselves.
Psychoanalytically
oriented
psychotherapists in particular have formulated
elaborate theories of how distortions in selfimage occur. They explain how the self-image is
formed as people internalize feedback from the
environment. They describe how people develop
their concepts of who they are by incorporating
explicit and implicit messages about themselves
from their parents and how distortions can occur

 when early interactions with their caregivers are
neither healthy nor nurturing.
When disturbances in self-image are severe
enough to cause significant problems in their lives,
many of these people turn to psychotherapy.
Insight-oriented psychotherapists focus on
helping the patients gain an understanding of the
dysfunctional patterns in their early relationships
that were the cause of the problem and provide
appropriate feedback and a therapeutic
environment where the patients can gradually
restructure and repair their negative self-image.
On the other hand, the Dalai Lama focuses on
“pulling out the arrow” rather than spending time
wondering who shot it. Instead of wondering why
people have low self-esteem or inflated selfconfidence, he presents a method of directly
combating these negative states of mind.

 In recent decades, the nature of “the self” was
one of the most researched topics in the field of
psychology. In the “me decade” of the 1980s, for
instance, thousands of articles appeared each
year, exploring issues related to self-esteem and
self-confidence. With this in mind, I addressed
the subject with the Dalai Lama.
“In one of our other conversations you spoke
of humility as a positive trait, and how it is linked
with the cultivation of patience and tolerance. In
Western psychology, and our culture in general, it
seems that being humble is largely overlooked in
favor of developing qualities like high levels of
self-esteem and self-confidence. In fact, in the

 West there’s a lot of importance placed on these
attributes. I was just wondering—do you feel that
Westerners sometimes tend to put too much
emphasis on self-confidence, that it’s kind of
overindulgent or too self-absorbed?”
“Not necessarily,” the Dalai Lama replied,
“although the subject can be quite complicated.
For example, the great spiritual practitioners are
those who have made a pledge, or developed the
determination, to eradicate all of their negative
states of mind in order to help to bring ultimate
happiness to all sentient beings. They have this
kind of vision and aspiration. This requires a
tremendous sense of self-confidence. And this
self-confidence can be very important because it
gives you a certain boldness of mind that helps
you accomplish great goals. In a way, this may
seem like a kind of arrogance, although not in a

 negative way. It is based on sound reasons. So,
here, I would consider them to be very
courageous—I would consider them to be
heroes.”
“Well, for a great spiritual master what may
appear on the surface to be a form of arrogance
may in fact be a kind of self-confidence and
courage,” I allowed. “But for normal people,
under everyday circumstances, the opposite is
more likely to occur—someone appears to have
strong self-confidence or high self-esteem, but it
can be in reality simply arrogance. I understand
that according to Buddhism, arrogance is
categorized as one of the ‘basic afflicted
emotions.’ In fact, I’ve read that according to
one system, they list seven different types of
arrogance. So, avoiding or overcoming
arrogance is considered very important. But so is

 having a strong sense of self-confidence. There
seems to be a fine line between them sometimes.
How can you tell the difference between them
and cultivate one while reducing the other?”
“Sometimes it’s quite difficult to distinguish
between confidence and arrogance,” he
conceded. “Maybe one way of distinguishing
between the two is to see whether or not it is
sound. One can have a very sound or very valid
sense of superiority in relation to someone else,
which could be very justified and which could be
valid. And then there could also be an inflated
sense of self which is totally groundless. That
would be arrogance. So in terms of their
phenomenological state, they may seem similar.
...”
“But, an arrogant person always feels that
they have a valid basis of ...”

 “That’s right, that’s right,” the Dalai Lama
acknowledged.
“So, then how can you distinguish between
the two?” I inquired.
“I think sometimes it can be judged only in
retrospect, either by the individual or from a third
person’s perspective.” The Dalai Lama paused,
then joked, “Maybe the person should go to the
court to find out if it is a case of inflated pride or
arrogance!” He laughed.
“In making the distinction between conceit
and valid self-confidence,” he went on, “one
could think in terms of the consequences of one’s
attitude—conceit and arrogance generally lead to
negative consequences whereas a healthy selfconfidence leads to more positive consequences.
So, here when we are dealing with ‘selfconfidence’ you need to look at what is the

 underlying sense of ’self.‘ I think one can
categorize two types. One sense of self, or’ego,‘
is concerned only with the fulfillment of one’s
self-interest, one’s selfish desires, with complete
disregard for the well-being of others. The other
type of ego or sense of self is based on a genuine
concern for others, and the desire to be of
service. In order to fulfill that wish to be of
service, one needs a strong sense of self, and a
sense of self-confidence. This kind of selfconfidence is the kind that leads to positive
consequences.”
“Earlier,” I noted, “I think you mentioned that
one way to help reduce arrogance or pride, if a
person acknowledged pride as a fault and wished
to overcome it, was to contemplate one’s
suffering—reflecting on all the ways we are
subject to or prone to suffering, and so on.

 Besides contemplating one’s suffering, are there
any other techniques or antidotes to work with
pride?”
He said, “One antidote is to reflect upon the
diversity of disciplines that you may have no
knowledge of. For example, in the modern
educational system you have a multitude of
disciplines. So by thinking about how many fields
you are ignorant of, it may help you overcome
pride.”
The Dalai Lama stopped speaking, and,
thinking that was all he had to say on the subject,
I started looking through my notes to move on to
a new topic. He suddenly resumed speaking in a
reflective tone, “You know, we’ve been talking
about developing a healthy self-confidence ... I
think perhaps honesty and self-confidence are
closely linked.”

 “Do you mean being honest with yourself
about what your capabilities are and so on? Or
do you mean being honest with others?” I asked.
“Both,” he replied. “The more honest you are,
the more open, the less fear you will have,
because there’s no anxiety about being exposed
or revealed to others. So, I think that the more
honest you are, the more self-confident you will
be ...”
“I’m interested in exploring a bit more about
how you personally deal with the issue of selfconfidence,” I said. “You’ve mentioned that
people seem to come to you and expect you to
perform miracles. They seem to put so much
pressure on you and have such high expectations.
Even if you have a proper underlying motivation,
doesn’t this still cause you to feel a certain lack of
confidence in your abilities?”

 “Here, I think you have to keep in mind what
you mean when you say either‘lack of
confidence’ or’possessing confidence’ with
regard to a particular act or whatever it may be.
In order for you to have a lack of confidence in
something, it implies that you have a kind of belief
that you can do it, that, generally speaking, it is
within your scope. And then if something is within
your scope and you can’t do it, you begin to feel,
‘Oh, you know, maybe I’m not good enough or
competent enough or up to it’ or something along
those lines. However, for me to realize that I
cannot perform miracles—that does not lead to
loss of confidence, because I never believed
myself to have that capacity in the first place. I
don’t expect myself to be able to perform
functions like the fully enlightened Buddhas—to
be able to know everything, perceive everything,

 or do the right thing at any and all times. So when
people come to me and ask me to heal them or
perform a miracle or something like that, instead
of making me feel a lack of confidence, it just
makes me feel quite awkward.
“I think that, generally, being honest with
oneself and others about what you are or are
not capable of doing can counteract that
feeling of lack of self-confidence.
“But then, now for example, in handling the
situation with China, sometimes I feel a lack of
self-confidence. But usually I consult about such
a situation with officials and in some cases
nonofficials. I ask my friends their opinion and
then discuss the matter. Since many of the
decisions are taken on the basis of discussions
with various people and not just taken rashly, any
decision that is taken then makes me feel quite

 confident and there’s no sense of regret for
having taken that course.”

Fearless and honest self-appraisal can be a
powerful weapon against self-doubt and low selfconfidence. The Dalai Lama’s belief that this kind
of honesty can act as an antidote to these
negative states of mind has in fact been confirmed
by a number of recent studies that clearly show
that those who have a realistic and accurate view
of themselves tend to like themselves better and
have more confidence than those with poor or
inaccurate self-knowledge.
Over the years, I’ve often witnessed the Dalai
Lama’s illustrating how self-confidence comes

 from being honest and straightforward about
one’s abilities. It came as quite a surprise to me
when I first heard him say in front of a large
audience simply “I don’t know” in response to a
question. Unlike what I was used to with
academic lecturers or those who set themselves
up as authorities, he admitted his lack of
knowledge without embarrassment, qualifying
statements, or attempting to appear that he knew
something by skirting the issue.
In fact, he seemed to take a certain delight
when confronted with a difficult question for
which he had no answer and often joked about it.
For example, one afternoon in Tucson, he had
been commenting on one verse of Shantideva’s
Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life that
was particularly complex in its logic. He struggled
with it for a while, got mixed up, then burst out

 laughing, saying:
“I’m confused! I think it’s better just to leave
it. Now, in the next verse ...”
In response to appreciative laughter from the
audience, he laughed even harder, commenting,
“There is a particular expression for this
approach. The expression is it’s like an old
person eating—an old person with very poor
teeth. The soft things you eat; the hard things, you
just leave.” Still laughing, he said, “So we’ll leave
it at that for today.” He never wavered in that
moment from his own supreme confidence.

 REFLECTING ON OUR
POTENTIAL AS AN ANTIDOTE TO
SELF-HATRED

On one trip to India in 1991, two years before
the Dalai Lama’s visit to Arizona, I briefly met
with him at his home in Dharamsala. That week
he had been meeting daily with a distinguished
group of Western scientists, physicians,
psychologists, and meditation teachers, in an
attempt to explore the mind-body connection and
understand the relationship between emotional
experience and physical health. I met with the
Dalai Lama late one afternoon, afterone of his
sessions with the scientists. Toward the end of

 our interview, the Dalai Lama asked, “You know
this week I’ve been meeting with these
scientists?”
“Yes ...”
“Something came up this week which I found
very surprising. This concept of ‘self-hatred.’
You are familiar with that concept?”
“Definitely. A fair proportion of my patients
suffer from it.”
“When these people were speaking about it,
at first I wasn’t certain if I was understanding the
concept correctly,” he laughed. “I thought, ‘Of
course we love ourselves! How can a person
hate himself or herself?’ Although I thought that I
had some understanding about how the mind
works, this idea of hating oneself was completely
new to me. The reason why I found it quite
unbelievable is that practicing Buddhists work

 very hard trying to overcome our self-centered
attitude, our selfish thoughts and motives. From
this viewpoint I think we love and cherish
ourselves too much. So to think of the possibility
of someone not cherishing oneself, and even
hating oneself, was quite, quite unbelievable. As a
psychiatrist, can you explain this concept for me,
how it occurs?”
I briefly described for him the psychological
view of how self-hatred arises. I explained how
our self-image is shaped by our parents and
upbringing, how we pick up implicit messages
about ourselves from them as we grow and
develop, and I outlined the specific conditions
that create a negative self-image. I went on to
detail the factors that exacerbate self-hatred,
such as when our behavior fails to live up to our
idealized self-image, and described some of the

 ways that self-hatred can be cultur ally
reinforced, particularly in some women and
minorities. While I was discussing these things,
the Dalai Lama continued to nod thoughtfully with
a quizzical expression on his face, as if he were
still having some difficulty grasping this strange
concept.

Groucho Marx once quipped, “I’d never join any
club that would have me for a member.”
Broadening this kind of negative self-view into an
observation about human nature, Mark Twain
said, “No man, deep down in the privacy of his

 own heart, has any considerable respect for
himself.” And taking this pessimistic view of
humanity and incorporating it into his
psychological theories, the humanistic
psychologist Carl Rogers once claimed, “Most
people despise themselves, regard themselves as
worthless and unlovable.”
There is a popular notion in our society,
shared by most contemporary psychotherapists,
that self-hatred is rampant within Western
culture. While it certainly exists, fortunately it may
not be as widespread as many believe. It
certainly is a common problem among those who
seek
psychotherapy,
but
sometimes
psychotherapists in clinical practice have a
skewed view, a tendency to base their general
view of human nature on those few individuals
who walk into their offices. Most of the data

 based on experimental evidence, however, have
established the fact that often people tend to (or
at least want to) see themselves in a favorable
light, rating themselves as “better than average” in
almost any survey asking about subjective and
socially desirable qualities.
So, while self-hatred may not be as universal
as commonly thought, it can still be a tremendous
obstacle for many people. I was as surprised by
the Dalai Lama’s reaction as he was by the
concept of self-hatred. His initial response alone
can be very revealing and healing.
There are two points related to his
remarkable reaction that warrant examination.
The first point is simply that he was unfamiliar
with the existence of self-hatred. The underlying
assumption that self-hatred is a widespread
human problem leads to an impressionistic sense

 that it is a deeply ingrained feature of the human
psyche. But the fact that it is virtually unheard of
within entire cultures, in this case the Tibetan
culture, strongly reminds us that this troubling
mental state, like all of the other negative mental
states that we have discussed, is not an intrinsic
part of the human mind. It is not something that
we are born with, irrevocably saddled with, nor
is it an indelible characteristic of our nature. It can
be removed. This realization alone can serve to
weaken its power, give us hope, and increase our
commitment to eliminate it.
The second point related to the Dalai Lama’s
initial reaction was his response, “Hate oneself?
Of course, we love ourselves!” For those of us
who suffer from self-hatred or know someone
who does, this response may seem incredibly
naive at first glance. But on closer investigation,

 there may be a penetrating truth to his response.
Love is difficult to define, and there may be
different definitions. But one definition of love,
and perhaps the most pure and exalted kind of
love, is an utter, absolute, and unqualified wish
for the happiness of another individual. It is a
heartfelt wish for the other’s happiness regardless
of whether he does something to injure us or
even whether we like him. Now, deep in our
hearts, there’s no question that every one of us
wants to be happy. So, if our definition of love
is based on a genuine wish for someone’s
happiness, then each of us does in fact love
himself or herself—every one of us sincerely
wishes for his or her own happiness. In my
clinical practice I’ve sometimes encountered the
most extreme cases of self-hatred, to the point
where the person experiences recurrent thoughts

 of suicide. But even in these most extreme cases,
the thought of death is ultimately based on the
individual’s wish (distorted and misguided though
it may be) to release her- or himself from
suffering, not cause it.
So perhaps the Dalai Lama was not far off the
mark in his belief that all of us have an underlying
self-love, and this idea suggests a powerful
antidote to self-hatred: we can directly counteract
thoughts of self-contempt by reminding ourselves
that no matter how much we may dislike some of
our characteristics, underneath it all we wish
ourselves to be happy, and that is a profound
kind of love.

 On a subsequent visit to Dharamsala, I returned
to the subject of self-hatred with the Dalai Lama.
By then he had familiarized himself with the
concept and had begun developing methods for
combating it.
“From the Buddhist point of view,” he
explained, “being in a depressed state, in a state
of discouragement, is seen as a kind of extreme
that can clearly be an obstacle to taking the steps
necessary to accomplish one’s goals. A state of
self-hatred is even far more extreme than simply
being discouraged, and this can be very, very
dangerous. For those engaged in Buddhist
practice, the antidote to self-hatred would be to
reflect upon the fact that all beings, including
oneself, have Buddha Nature—the seed or
potential for perfection, full Enlightenment—no
matter how weak or poor or deprived one’s

 present situation may be. So those people
involved in Buddhist practice who suffer from
self-hatred or self-loathing should avoid
contemplating the suffering nature of existence or
the underlying unsatisfactory nature of existence,
and instead they should concentrate more on the
positive aspects of one’s existence, such as
appreciating the tremendous potential that lies
within oneself as a human being. And by
reflecting upon these opportunities and potentials,
they will be able to increase their sense of worth
and confidence in themselves.”
Raising my now-standard question from the
perspective of a non-Buddhist, I asked, “Well,
what would be the antidote for someone who
may not have heard of the concept of Buddha
Nature or who may not be a Buddhist?”
“One thing in general that we could point out

 to such people is that we are gifted as human
beings with this wonderful human intelligence. On
top of that, all human beings have the capacity to
be very determined and to direct that strong
sense of determination in whatever direction they
would like to use it. There is no doubt of this. So
if one maintains an awareness of these potentials
and reminds oneself of them repeatedly until it
becomes part of one’s customary way of
perceiving human beings—including oneself—
then this could serve to help reduce feelings of
discouragement, helplessness, and selfcontempt.”
The Dalai Lama stopped for a moment, then
proceeded with a probing inflection which
suggested that he was still actively exploring,
continuously engaging in a process of discovery.
“I think that here there might be some sort of

 parallel to the way we treat physical illnesses.
When doctors treat someone for a specific
illness, not only do they give antibiotics for the
specific condition, but they also make sure that
the person’s underlying physical condition is such
that he or she can take antibiotics and tolerate
them. So in order to ensure that, the doctors
make sure, for instance, that the person is
generally well nourished, and often they may also
have to give vitamins or whatever to build the
body. So long as the person has that underlying
strength in his or her body, then there is the
potential or capacity within the body to heal itself
from the illness through medication. Similarly, so
long as we know and maintain an awareness
that we have this marvelous gift of human
intelligence and a capacity to develop
determination and use it in positive ways, in

 some sense we have this underlying mental
health. An underlying strength, that comes
from realizing we have this great human
potential. This realization can act as a sort of
built-in mechanism that allows us to deal with any
difficulty, no matter what situation we are facing,
without losing hope or sinking into self-hatred.”
Reminding ourselves of the great qualities we
share with all human beings acts to neutralize the
impulse to think we’re bad or undeserving. Many
Tibetans do this as a daily meditation practice.
Perhaps that’s the reason why in Tibetan culture
self-hatred never took hold.

 Part V

CLOSING REFLECTIONS ON
LIVING A SPIRITUAL LIFE

 Chapter 15

BASIC SPIRITUAL VALUES

The art of happiness has many components. As
we’ve seen, it begins with developing an
understanding of the truest sources of happiness
and setting our priorities in life based on the

 cultivation of those sources. It involves an inner
discipline, a gradual process of rooting out
destructive mental states and replacing them with
positive, constructive states of mind, such as
kindness, tolerance, and forgiveness. In
identifying the factors that lead to a full and
satisfying life, we conclude with a discussion of
the final component—spirituality.
There is a natural tendency to associate
spirituality with religion. The Dalai Lama’s
approach to achieving happiness has been
shaped by his years of rigorous training as an
ordained Buddhist monk. He is also widely
regarded as a preeminent Buddhist scholar. For
many, however, it is not his grasp of complex
philosophical issues that offers the most appeal
but rather his personal warmth, humor, and
down-to-earth approach to life. During the

 course of our conversations, in fact, his basic
humanness seemed to override even his primary
role as a Buddhist monk. Despite his shaved
head and striking maroon robes, despite his
position as one of the most prominent religious
figures in the world, the tone of our conversations
was simply of one human being to another,
discussing the problems that we all share.
In helping us understand the true meaning of
spirituality, the Dalai Lama began by
distinguishing between spirituality and religion:
“I believe that it is essential to appreciate our
potential as human beings and recognize the
importance of inner transformation. This should
be achieved through what could be called a
process of mental development. Sometimes, I
call this having a spiritual dimension in our life.
“There can be two levels of spirituality. One

 level of spirituality has to do with our religious
beliefs. In this world, there are so many different
people, so many different dispositions. There are
five billion human beings and in a certain way I
think we need five billion different religions,
because there is such a large variety of
dispositions. I believe that each individual should
embark upon a spiritual path that is best suited to
his or her mental disposition, natural inclination,
temperament, belief, family, and cultural
background.
“Now, for example, as a Buddhist monk, I
find Buddhism to be most suitable. So, for
myself, I’ve found that Buddhism is best. But that
does not mean Buddhism is best for everyone.
That’s clear. It’s definite. If I believed that
Buddhism were best for everyone, that would be
foolish, because different people have different

 mental dispositions. So, the variety of people
calls for a variety of religions. The purpose of
religion is to benefit people, and I think that if we
only had one religion, after a while it would cease
to benefit many people. If we had a restaurant,
for instance, and it only served one dish—day
after day, for every meal—that restaurant
wouldn’t have many customers left after a while.
People need and appreciate diversity in their
food because there are so many different tastes.
In the same way, religions are meant to nourish
the human spirit. And I think we can learn to
celebrate that diversity in religions and develop a
deep appreciation of the variety of religions. So
certain people may find Judaism, the Christian
tradition, or the Islamic tradition to be most
effective for them. Therefore, we must respect
and appreciate the value of all the different major

 world religious traditions.
“All of these religions can make an effective
contribution for the benefit of humanity. They are
all designed to make the individual a happier
person, and the world a better place. However,
in order for the religion to have an impact in
making the world a better place, I think it’s
important for the individual practitioner to
sincerely practice the teachings of that religion.
One must integrate the religious teachings into
one’s life, wherever one is, so one can use them
as a source of inner strength. And one must gain
a deeper understanding of the religion’s ideas,
not just on an intellectual level but with a deep
feeling, making them part of one’s inner
experience.
“I believe that one can cultivate a deep
respect for all the different religious traditions.

 One reason to respect these other traditions is
that all of these traditions can provide an ethical
framework which can govern one’s behavior and
have positive effects. For instance, in the
Christian tradition a belief in God can provide
one with a coherent and clear-cut ethical
framework which can govern one’s behavior and
way of life—and it can be a very powerful
approach because there is a certain intimacy
created in one’s relationship with God, and the
way to demonstrate one’s love of God, the God
who created you, is by showing love and
compassion to one’s fellow human beings.
“I believe that there are many similar reasons
to respect other religious traditions as well. All
major religions, of course, have provided
tremendous benefit for millions of human beings
throughout many centuries in the past. And even

 at this very moment, millions of people still get a
benefit, get some kind of inspiration, from these
different religious traditions. It is clear. And in the
future also, these different religious traditions will
give inspiration to millions of coming generations.
That is a fact. So therefore, it is very, very
important to realize that reality and respect other
traditions.
“I think that one way of strengthening that
mutual respect is through closer contact between
those of different religious faiths—personal
contact. I have made efforts over the past few
years to meet and have dialogues with, for
example, the Christian community and the Jewish
community, and I think that some really positive
results have come of this. Through this kind of
closer contact we can learn about the useful
contributions that these religions have made to

 humanity and find useful aspects of the other
traditions that we can learn from. We may even
discover methods and techniques that we can
adopt in our own practice.
“So, it is essential that we develop closer
bonds among the various religions; through this
we can make a common effort for the benefit of
humanity. There are so many things that divide
humanity, so many problems in the world.
Religion should be a remedy to help reduce the
conflict and suffering in the world, not another
source of conflict.
“We often hear people say that all human
beings are equal. By this we mean that everyone
has the obvious desire of happiness. Everybody
has the right to be a happy person. And everyone
has the right to overcome suffering. So if
someone is deriving happiness or benefit from a

 particular religious tradition, it becomes important
to respect the rights of others; thus we must learn
to respect all these major religious traditions.
That is clear.”

During the Dalai Lama’s week of talks in Tucson,
the spirit of mutual respect was more than just
wishful thinking. Those of many different religious
traditions were found among the audience,
including a sizable representation of Christian
clergy. Despite the differences in traditions, a
peaceful and harmonious atmosphere pervaded
the room. It was palpable. There was a spirit of
exchange as well, and no little curiosity among
the non-Buddhists present about the Dalai

 Lama’s daily spiritual practice. This curiosity
prompted one listener to ask:
“Whether one is a Buddhist or of a different
tradition, practices such as prayer seem to be
emphasized. Why is prayer important for a
spiritual life?”
The Dalai Lama answered, “I think prayer is,
for the most part, a simple daily reminder of your
deeply held principles and convictions. I, myself,
repeat certain Buddhist verses every morning.
The verses may look like prayers, but they are
actually reminders. Reminders of how to speak
to others, how to deal with other people, how to
deal with problems in your daily life, things like
that. So, for the most part, my practice involves
reminders—reviewing the importance of
compassion, forgiveness, all these things. And, of
course, it also includes certain Buddhist

 meditations about the nature of reality, and also
certain visualization practices. So, in my own
daily practice, my own daily prayers, if I go
leisurely, it takes about four hours. It’s quite
long.”
The thought of spending four hours a day in
prayer prompted another listener to ask, “I’m a
working mother with small children, with very
little free time. For someone who is really busy,
how does one find the time to do these kinds of
prayers and meditation practices?”
“Even in my case, if I wish to complain, I can
always complain about lack of time,” the Dalai
Lama remarked. “I’m very busy. However, if
you make the effort, you can always find some
time, say, in the early morning. Then, I think there
are some times like the weekend. You can
sacrifice some of your fun,” he laughed. “So at

 least, I think daily, say a half an hour. Or if you
make the effort, try hard enough, perhaps you
may be able to find, let us say, thirty minutes in
the morning and thirty minutes in the evening. If
you really think about it, maybe it is possible to
figure out a way of getting some time.
“However, if you think seriously about the
true meaning of spiritual practices, it has to do
with the development and training of your mental
state, attitudes, and psychological and emotional
state and well-being. You should not confine
your understanding of spiritual practice to terms
of some physical activities or verbal activities, like
doing recitations of prayers and chanting. If your
understanding of spiritual practice is limited to
only these activities, then, of course, you will
need a specific time, a separate allotted time to
do your practice—because you can’t go around

 doing your daily chores, like cooking and so on,
while reciting mantras. That could be quite
annoying to people around you. However, if you
understand spiritual practice in its true sense, then
you can use all twenty-four hours of your day for
your practice. True spirituality is a mental
attitude that you can practice at any time. For
example, if you find yourself in a situation in
which you might be tempted to insult someone,
then you immediately take precautions and
restrain yourself from doing that. Similarly, if you
encounter a situation in which you may lose your
temper, immediately you are mindful and say,
‘No, this is not the appropriate way.’ That
actually is a spiritual practice. Seen in that light,
you will always have time.
“This reminds me of one of the Tibetan
Kadampa masters, Potowa, who said that for a

 meditator who has a certain degree of inner
stability and realization, every event, every
experience you are exposed to comes as a kind
of a teaching. It’s a learning experience. This I
think is very true.
“So, from this perspective, even when you are
exposed to, for instance, disturbing scenes of
violence and sex, like in TV and films, there is a
possibility to view them with an underlying
mindfulness of the harmful effects of going to
extremes. Then, instead of being totally
overwhelmed by the sight, rather you can take
these scenes as a kind of an indicator of the
damaging nature of unchecked negative emotions
—something from which you can learn lessons.”

 But learning lessons from old reruns of The ATeam or Melrose Place is one thing. As a
practicing Buddhist, however, the Dalai Lama’s
personal spiritual regimen certainly includes
features unique to the Buddhist path. In
describing his daily practice, for instance, he
mentioned it includes Buddhist meditations on the
nature of reality, as well as certain visualization
practices. While in the context of this discussion
he mentioned these practices only in passing,
over the years I’ve had an opportunity to hear
him discuss these topics at length—his talks
comprising some of the most complex
discussions I’ve ever heard on any subject. His
talks on the nature of reality were filled with
labyrinthine philosophical arguments and
analyses; his descriptions of Tantric visualizations

 were inconceivably intricate and elaborate—
meditations and visualizations whose objective
seemed to be to construct within one’s
imagination a sort of holographic atlas of the
universe. He had spent a lifetime engaged in the
study and practice of these Buddhist meditations.
It was with this in mind, knowing the monumental
scope of his efforts, that I asked him:
“Can you describe the practical benefit or
impact these spiritual practices have had on your
day-to-day life?”
The Dalai Lama was silent for several
moments, then quietly replied, “Although my own
experience may be very little, one thing that I can
say for certain is that I feel that through Buddhist
training, I feel that my mind has become much
more calm. That’s definite. Although the change
has come about gradually, perhaps centimeter by

 centimeter,” he laughed, “I think that there has
been a change in my attitude towards myself and
others. Although it’s difficult to point to the
precise causes of this change, I think that it has
been influenced by a realization, not full
realization, but a certain feeling or sense of the
underlying fundamental nature of reality, and also
through contemplating subjects such as
impermanence, our suffering nature, and the value
of compassion and altruism.
“So, for example, even when thinking about
those Communist Chinese who inflicted great
harm on some of the Tibetan people—as a result
of my Buddhist training I feel a certain
compassion towards even the torturer, because I
understand that the torturer was in fact compelled
by other negative forces. Because of these things
and my Bodhisattva vows and commitments,

 even if a person committed atrocities, I simply
cannot feel or think that because of their
atrocities they should experience negative things
or not experience a moment of happiness.6 The
Bodhisattva vow has helped me develop this
attitude; it has been very useful, so naturally I
love this vow.
“This reminds me of one senior chant master
who is staying at Namgyal Monastery. He was in
Chinese prisons as a political prisoner and in
labor camps for twenty years. Once I asked him
what was the most difficult situation he faced
when he was in prison. Surprisingly, he said that
he felt the greatest danger was of losing
compassion for the Chinese!
“There are many such stories. For example,
three days ago I met a monk who spent many
years in Chinese prisons. He told me that he was

 twenty-four years old at the time of the 1959
Tibetan uprising. At that time he joined the
Tibetan forces in Norbulinga. He was caught by
the Chinese and put in prison along with three
brothers who were killed there. Two other
brothers were also killed. Then his parents died
in a labor camp. But he told me that when he was
in prison, he reflected on his life until then and
concluded that even though he had spent his
entire life as a monk at Drepung Monastery, until
that time he felt that he was not a good monk. He
felt that he had been a stupid monk. At that
moment he made a pledge that now that he was
in prison, he would try to be a genuinely good
monk. So as a result of his Buddhist practices,
because of this training of the mind, he was able
to remain mentally very happy even if he was in
physical pain. Even when he underwent torture

 and severe beatings, he was able to survive it and
still feel happy by viewing it as a cleansing of his
past negative Karma.
“So, through these examples, one can really
appreciate the value of incorporating spiritual
practices within one’s everyday life.”

Thus, the Dalai Lama added the final
ingredient of a happier life—the spiritual
dimension. Through the teachings of the Buddha,
the Dalai Lama and many others have found a
meaningful framework that enables them to
endure and even transcend the pain and suffering
that life sometimes brings. And as the Dalai Lama
suggests, each of the world’s major religious
traditions can offer the same opportunities to help
one achieve a happier life. The power of faith,

 generated on a widespread scale by these
religious traditions, is interwoven in the lives of
millions. That deep religious faith has sustained
countless people through difficult times.
Sometimes it operates in small quiet ways,
sometimes in profound transformative
experiences. Every one of us, at some time
during our lives, has no doubt witnessed that
power operate on a family member, a friend, or
an acquaintance. Occasionally, examples of the
sustaining power of faith find their way onto the
front pages. Many are familiar, for instance, with
the ordeal of Terry Anderson, an ordinary man
who was suddenly kidnapped off the street in
Beirut one morning in 1985. A blanket was
thrown over him, he was shoved into a car, and
for the next seven years he was held as a hostage
by Hezbollah, a group of Islamic fundamentalist

 extremists. Until 1991 he was imprisoned in
damp, filthy basements and small cells,
blindfolded and chained for extended periods,
enduring regular beatings and harsh conditions.
When he was finally released, the world turned
its eyes toward him and found a man overjoyed
to be returned to his family and his life but with
surprisingly little bitterness and hatred toward his
captors. When questioned by reporters about the
source of his remarkable strength, he identified
faith and prayer as significant factors that helped
him endure his ordeal.
The world is filled with such examples of the
ways in which religious faith offers concrete help
in times of trouble. And extensive recent surveys
seem to confirm the fact that religious faith can
substantially contribute to a happier life. Those
conducted by independent researchers and

 polling organizations (such as the Gallup
company) have found that religious people report
feeling happy and satisfied with life more often
than non-religious people. Studies have found
that not only is faith a predictor of self-reports of
feelings of well-being, but a strong religious faith
also appears to help individuals deal more
effectively with issues such as aging or coping
with personal crises and traumatic events. In
addition, statistics show that families of those with
strong religious belief often have lower rates of
delinquency, alcohol and drug abuse, and ruined
marriages. There is even some evidence to
suggest that faith may have benefits for people’s
physical health—even for those with serious
illnesses. There have, in fact, been literally
hundreds of scientific and epi demiologic studies
establishing a link between strong religious faith,

 lower death rates, and improved health. In one
study, elderly women with strong religious beliefs
were able to walk farther after hip surgery than
those with fewer religious convictions, and they
were also less depressed following the surgery. A
study done by Ronna Casar Harris and Mary
Amanda Dew at the University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center found that heart-transplant
patients with strong religious beliefs have less
difficulty coping with postoperative medical
regimens and display better long-term physical
and emotional health. In another, conducted by
Dr. Thomas Oxman and his colleagues at
Dartmouth Medical School, it was found that
patients over the age of fifty-five who underwent
open-heart surgery for coronary artery or heart
valve disease and who had taken refuge in their
religious beliefs were three times more likely to

 survive than those who did not.
The benefits of a strong religious faith
sometimes come about as a direct product of
certain specific doctrines and beliefs of a
particular tradition. Many Buddhists, for instance,
are helped to endure their suffering as a result of
their firm belief in the doctrine of Karma. In the
same way, those who have an unshak able faith
in God are often able to withstand intense
hardship because of their belief in an omniscient
and loving God—a God whose plan may be
obscure to us at present but One who, in His
wisdom, will ultimately reveal His love for us.
With faith in the teachings of the Bible, they can
take comfort in verses such as Romans 8:28: “All
things work together for the good to them that
love God, to them who are called according to
His purpose.”

 Although some of the rewards of faith may be
based on specific doctrines unique to a particular
religious tradition, there are other strength-giving
features of a spiritual life that are common to all
religions. Involvement in any religious group can
create a feeling of belonging, communal ties, a
caring connection with fellow practitioners. It
offers a meaningful framework in which one can
connect and relate with others. And it can give
one a feeling of acceptance. Strongly held
religious beliefs can give one a deep sense of
purpose, providing meaning for one’s life. These
beliefs can offer hope in the face of adversity,
suffering, and death. They can help one adopt an
eternal perspective that allows one to get outside
of oneself when overwhelmed by life’s daily
problems.
Although all these potential benefits are

 available to those who choose to practice the
teachings of an established religion, it is clear that
having a religious belief alone is no guarantee of
happiness and peace. For example, at the very
same moment Terry Anderson sat chained in a
cell demonstrating the finest attributes of religious
faith, just outside his cell raged mass violence and
hatred demonstrating the very worst attributes of
religious faith. For years in Lebanon, various
sects of Muslims were at war with Christians and
Jews, fueled by violent hatred on all sides and
resulting in unspeakable atrocities committed in
the name of faith. It’s an old story, and one that
has been told too often throughout history and
repeated too often in the modern world.
Because of this potential to breed divisiveness
and hatred, it is easy to lose faith in religious
institutions. This has led some religious figures

 such as the Dalai Lama to try to distill those
elements of a spiritual life that can be universally
applied by any individual to enhance his or her
happiness, regardless of religious tradition or
whether he or she believes in religion.

Thus, with a tone of complete conviction, the
Dalai Lama concluded his discussion with his
vision of a truly spiritual life:
“So, in speaking of having a spiritual
dimension to our lives, we have identified our
religious beliefs as one level of spirituality. Now
regarding religion, if we believe in any religion,
that’s good. But even without a religious belief,
we can still manage. In some cases, we can

 manage even better. But that’s our own individual
right; if we wish to believe, good! If not, it’s all
right. But then there’s another level of spirituality.
That is what I call basic spirituality—basic
human qualities of goodness, kindness,
compassion, caring. Whether we are believers or
nonbelievers, this kind of spirituality is essential. I
personally consider this second level of
spirituality to be more important than the first,
because no matter how wonderful a particular
religion may be, it will still only be accepted by a
limited number of human beings, only a portion of
humanity. But as long as we are human beings, as
long as we are members of the human family, all
of us need these basic spiritual values. Without
these, human existence remains hard, very dry.
As a result, none of us can be a happy person,
our whole family will suffer, and then, eventually,

 society will be more troubled. So, it becomes
clear that cultivating these kinds of basic spiritual
values becomes crucial.
“In seeking to cultivate these basic spiritual
values, I think we need to remember that out of
the, say, five billion human beings on this planet, I
think perhaps one or two billion are very sincere,
genuine believers in religion. Of course, when I
refer to sincere believers, I’m not including those
people who simply say, for example, ‘I am
Christian’ mainly because their family
background is Christian but in daily life may not
consider very much about the Christian faith or
actively practice it. So excluding these people, I
believe that there are perhaps only around one
billion who sincerely practice their religion. That
means that four billion, the majority of the people
on this earth, are nonbelievers. So we must still

 find a way to try to improve life for this majority
of the people, the four billion people who aren’t
involved in a specific religion—ways to help them
become good human beings, moral people,
without any religion. Here I think that education is
crucial—instilling in people a sense that
compassion, kindness, and so on are the basic
good qualities of human beings, not just a matter
of religious subjects. I think earlier we spoke at
greater length about the prime importance of
human warmth, affection, and compassion in
people’s physical health, happiness, and peace of
mind. This is a very practical issue, not religious
theory or philosophical speculation. It is a key
issue. And I think that this is in fact the essence of
all the religious teachings of the different
traditions. But it remains just as crucial for those
who choose not to follow any particular religion.

 For those people, I think we can educate them
and impress upon them that it’s all right to remain
without any religion but be a good human being,
a sensible human being, with a sense of
responsibility and commitment for a better,
happier world.
“In general, it is possible to indicate your
particular religious or spiritual way of life through
external means, such as wearing certain clothes,
or having a shrine or altar in your house, or doing
recitations and chanting, and so on. There are
ways of demonstrating that externally. However,
these practices or activities are secondary to your
conducting a truly spiritual way of life, based on
the basic spiritual values, because it is possible
that all of these external religious activities can still
go along with a person’s harboring a very
negative state of mind. But true spirituality should

 have the result of making a person calmer,
happier, more peaceful.
“All of the virtuous states of mind—
compassion, tolerance, forgiveness, caring, and
so on—these mental qualities are genuine
Dharma, or genuine spiritual qualities, because all
of these internal mental qualities cannot coexist
with ill feelings or negative states of mind.
“So, engaging in training or a method of
bringing about inner discipline within one’s mind
is the essence of a religious life, an inner discipline
that has the purpose of cultivating these positive
mental states. Thus, whether one leads a spiritual
life depends on whether one has been successful
in bringing about that disciplined, tamed state of
mind and translating that state of mind into one’s
daily actions.”

 The Dalai Lama was due to attend a small
reception held in honor of a group of donors who
had been strong supporters of the Tibetan cause.
Outside the reception room a large crowd had
gathered in anticipation of his appearance. By the
time of his arrival the crowd had become quite
dense. Among the onlookers I saw a man whom
I had noticed a couple of times during the week.
He was of indeterminate age, although I would
have guessed middle twenties, maybe early
thirties, tall and very thin. Notable for his
disheveled appearance, he, however, had caught
my attention because of his expression, one that I
had frequently seen among my patients—anxious,
profoundly depressed, in pain. And I thought I
noticed slight repetitive involuntary movements of

 the musculature around his mouth. “Tardive
dyskinesia,” I had silently diagnosed, a
neurological condition caused by chronic use of
antipsychotic medication. “Poor guy,” I thought
at the time but quickly forgot about him.
As the Dalai Lama arrived, the crowd
condensed, pressing forward to greet him. The
security staff, most of them volunteers, struggled
to hold back the advancing mass of people and
clear a path to the reception room. The troubled
young man whom I had seen earlier, now with a
somewhat bewildered expression, was crushed
forward by the crowd and pushed to the edge of
the clearing made by the security team. As the
Dalai Lama made his way through, he noticed the
man, broke free from the mooring of the security
crew, and stopped to talk to him. The man was
startled at first and began to speak very rapidly

 to the Dalai Lama, who spoke a few words in
return. I couldn’t hear what they were saying, but
I saw that as the man spoke, he started to
become visibly more agitated. The man was
saying something, but instead of responding, the
Dalai Lama spontaneously took the man’s hand
between his, patted it gently, and for several
moments simply stood there silently nodding. As
he held the man’s hand firmly, looking into his
eyes, it seemed as if he were unaware of the
mass of people around him. The look of pain and
agitation suddenly seemed to drain from the
man’s face and tears ran down his cheeks.
Although the smile that surfaced and slowly
spread across his features was thin, a look of
comfort and gladness appeared in the man’s
eyes.
The Dalai Lama has repeatedly emphasized

 that inner discipline is the basis of a spiritual life.
It is the fundamental method of achieving
happiness. As he explained throughout this book,
from his perspective inner discipline involves
combating negative states of mind such as anger,
hatred, and greed, and cultivating positive states
such as kindness, compassion, and tolerance. He
also has pointed out that a happy life is built on a
foundation of a calm, stable state of mind. The
practice of inner discipline can include formal
meditation techniques that are intended to help
stabilize the mind and achieve that calm state.
Most spiritual traditions include practices that
seek to quiet the mind, to put us more in touch
with our deeper spiritual nature. At the
conclusion of the Dalai Lama’s series of public
talks in Tucson, he presented instruction on one
meditation designed to help us begin to quiet our

 thoughts, observe the underlying nature of the
mind, and thus develop a “stillness of mind.”
Looking out over the assembly, he began to
speak in his characteristic manner as if, instead of
addressing a large group, he was personally
instructing each individual in the audience. At
times he was still and focused, at times more
animated, choreo graphing his instruction with
subtle head nods, hand gestures, and gentle
rocking motions.

 MEDITATION ON THE NATURE
OF THE MIND

“The purpose of this exercise is to begin to
recognize and get a feel for the nature of our
mind,” he began, “at least on a conventional level.
Generally, when we refer to our ‘mind,’ we are
talking about an abstract concept. Without having
a direct experience of our mind, for example, if
we are asked to identify the mind, we may be
compelled to merely point to the brain. Or, if we
are asked to define the mind, we may say it is
something that has the capacity to ‘know,’
something that is ‘clear’ and ’cognitive.‘ But
without having directly grasped the mind through

 meditative practices, these definitions are just
words. It’s important to be able to identify the
mind through direct experience, not just as an
abstract concept. So the purpose of this exercise
is to be able to directly feel or grasp the
conventional nature of the mind, so when you say
the mind has qualities of ’clarity’ and ‘cognition,’
you will be able to identify it through experience,
not just as an abstract concept.
“This exercise helps you to deliberately stop
the discursive thoughts and gradually remain in
that state for longer and longer duration. As you
practice this exercise, eventually you will get to a
feeling as if there is nothing there, a sense of
vacuity. But if you go farther, you eventually
begin to recognize the underlying nature of the
mind, the qualities of ‘clarity’ and ’knowing.‘ It is
similar to having a pure crystal glass full of water.

 If the water is pure, you can see the bottom of
the glass, but you still recognize that the water is
there.
“So, today, let us meditate on
nonconceptuality. This is not a mere state of
dullness, or a blanked-out state of mind. Rather,
what you should do is, first of all, generate the
determination that ‘I will maintain a state without
conceptual thoughts.’ The way in which you
should do that is this:
“Generally speaking, our mind is
predominantly directed towards external objects.
Our attention follows after the sense experiences.
It remains at a predominantly sensory and
conceptual level. In other words, normally our
awareness is directed towards physical sensory
experiences and mental concepts. But in this
exercise, what you should do is to withdraw your

 mind inward; don’t let it chase after or pay
attention to sensory objects. At the same time,
don’t allow it to be so totally withdrawn that
there is a kind of dullness or lack of mindfulness.
You should maintain a very full state of alertness
and mindfulness, and then try to see the natural
state of your consciousness—a state in which
your consciousness is not afflicted by thoughts of
the past, the things that have happened, your
memories and remembrances; nor is it afflicted
by thoughts of the future, like your future plans,
anticipations, fears, and hopes. But rather, try to
remain in a natural and neutral state.
“This is a bit like a river that is flowing quite
strongly, in which you cannot see the riverbed
very clearly. If, however, there was some way
you could stop the flow in both directions, from
where the water is coming and to where the

 water is flowing, then you could keep the water
still. That would allow you to see the base of the
river quite clearly. Similarly, when you are able to
stop your mind from chasing sensory objects and
thinking about the past and future and so on, and
when you can free your mind from being totally
‘blanked out’ as well, then you will begin to see
underneath this turbulence of the thought
processes. There is an underlying stillness, an
underlying clarity of the mind. You should try to
observe or experience this ...
“This can be very difficult at the initial stage,
so let us begin to practice from this very session.
At the initial stage, when you begin to experience
this underlying natural state of consciousness, you
might experience it in the form of some sort of
‘absence.’ This is happening because we are so
habituated to understanding our mind in terms of

 external objects; we tend to look at the world
through our concepts, images, and so on. So
when you withdraw your mind from external
objects, it’s almost as if you can’t recognize your
mind. There’s a kind of absence, a kind of
vacuity. However, as you slowly progress and
get used to it, you begin to notice an underlying
clarity, a luminosity. That’s when you begin to
appreciate and realize the natural state of the
mind.
“Many of the truly profound meditative
experiences must come on the basis of this kind
of stillness of mind.... Oh,” the Dalai Lama
laughed, “I should warn that in this type of
meditation, since there is no specific object to
focus on, there is a danger of falling asleep.
“So, now let us meditate ...
“To begin, first do three rounds of breathing,

 and focus your attention simply on the breath.
Just be aware of inhaling, exhaling, and then
inhaling, exhaling—three times. Then, start the
meditation.”
The Dalai Lama removed his glasses, folded
his hands in his lap, and remained motionless in
meditation. Total silence pervaded the hall, as
fifteen hundred people turned inward, in the
solitude of fifteen hundred private worlds,
seeking to still their thoughts and perhaps catch a
glimpse of the true nature of their own mind.
After five minutes, the silence was cracked but
not broken as the Dalai Lama began to chant
softly, his voice low and melodic, gently leading
his listeners from their meditation. At the close of
the session that day, as always, the Dalai Lama
folded his hands together, bowed to his audience
out of affection and respect, rose, and made his

 way through the surrounding crowd. His hands
remained clasped together and he continued to
bow as he left the room. As he walked through
the dense crowd he bowed so low, in fact, that
for anyone who stood more than a few feet
away, it was impossible to see him. He appeared
to be lost in a sea of heads. From a distance one
could still detect his path, however, from the
subtle shift in the crowd’s movement as he
passed along. It was as if he had ceased to be a
visible object and had simply become a felt
presence.

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This book would not exist without the efforts and
kindness of many people. First, I would like to
extend my heartfelt thanks to Tenzin Gyatso, the
fourteenth Dalai Lama, with deep gratitude for his
boundless kindness, generosity, inspiration, and
friendship. And to my parents, James and Bettie
Cutler, in loving memory, for providing the
foundation for my own path to happiness in life.
My sincere thanks extends to many others:

 To Dr. Thupten Jinpa for his friendship, his
help in editing the Dalai Lama’s portions of this
book, and his critical role in acting as interpreter
for the Dalai Lama’s public talks and many of our
private conversations. Also to Lobsang Jordhen,
the Ven. Lhakdor, for acting as interpreter for a
number of my conversations with the Dalai Lama
in India.
To Tenzin Geyche Tethong, Rinchen Dharlo,
and Dawa Tsering, for their support and
assistance in many ways over the years.
To the many people who worked so hard to
assure that the Dalai Lama’s 1993 visit to
Arizona was a rewarding experience for so many
others: to Claude d‘Estree, Ken Bacher, and the
board and staff of Arizona Teachings, Inc., to
Peggy Hitchcock and the board of Arizona
Friends of Tibet, to Dr. Pam Willson and those

 who helped organize the Dalai Lama’s address at
Arizona State University, and to the dozens of
dedicated volunteers for their tireless efforts on
behalf of all those who attended the Dalai Lama’s
teachings in Arizona.
To my extraordinary agents, Sharon Friedman
and Ralph Vicinanza, and their wonderful staff,
for their encouragement, kindness, dedication,
help in many aspects of this project, and hard
work above and beyond the call of duty. I owe
them a special debt of gratitude.
To those who provided invaluable editorial
assistance, insight, and expertise, as well as
personal support during the lengthy writing
process: to Ruth Hapgood for her skillful efforts
in editing earlier versions of the manuscript, to
Barbara Gates and Dr. Ronna Kabatznick for
their indispensable help in wading through

 voluminous material and focusing and organizing
that material into a coherent structure, and to my
very talented editor at Riverhead, Amy Hertz, for
believing in the project and helping shape the
book into its final form. Also to Jennifer Repo
and the hard-working copy editors and staff at
Riverhead Books. I would also like to extend
warm thanks to those who helped transcribe the
Dalai Lama’s public talks in Arizona, type the
transcripts of my conversations with the Dalai
Lama, and type parts of the earliest versions of
the manuscript.

In closing, my profound thanks:
To my teachers.

 To my family and the many friends who have
enriched my life in more ways than I can express:
to Gina Beckwith Eckel, Dr. David Weiss and
Daphne Atkeson, Dr. Gillian Hamilton, Helen
Mitsios, David Greenwalt, Dale Brozosky, Kristi
Ingham Espinasse, Dr. David Klebanoff,
Henrietta Bernstein, Tom Minor, Ellen Wyatt
Gothe, Dr. Gail McDonald, Larry Cutler, Randy
Cutler, Lori Warren, and with special thanks and
deep appreciation to Candee and Scott Briertey
—and to other friends whom I may have failed to
mention here by name, but whom I hold in my
heart with continued love, gratitude, and respect.

 THE ART OF HAPPINESS BOOK
SERIES

The Art of Happiness: A Handbook for
Living, 10th Anniversary Edition, by His
Holiness the Dalai Lama and Howard C. Cutler,
M.D. New York: Riverhead Books, 2009
(originally published 1998).

 The Art of Happiness at Work by His Holiness
the Dalai Lama and Howard C. Cutler, M.D.
New York: Riverhead Books, 2003.

The Art of Happiness in a Troubled World by
His Holiness the Dalai Lama and Howard C.
Cutler, M.D. New York: Doubleday 2009.

The Art of Happiness book project is a series of
books on the theme of human happiness, written
by His Holiness the Dalai Lama and Howard C.
Cutler, M.D. The books examine various facets
of human happiness from both Eastern and
Western perspectives. Since the original
publication of The Art of Happiness: A

 Handbook for Living in 1998, there has been a
rapidly growing interest in the subject of
happiness worldwide, including a new field of
psychology devoted to the scientific study of
human happiness and flourishing. During these
years, the Dalai Lama and Dr. Cutler have
continued their collaboration.

 ABOUT THE AUTHORS

His Holiness the Dalai Lama was born on July 6,
1935, to a poor farming family in northeastern
Tibet. At the age of two he was recognized as
the Dalai Lama, the spiritual and temporal leader
of Tibet, the fourteenth in a succession dating
back six hundred years. At age six he began his
lifelong training as a Buddhist monk. Since 1959,
he has lived in exile from Tibet in Dharamsala,

 India. His tireless efforts on behalf of human
rights, world peace, and basic human values have
brought him international recognition. He is the
recipient of numerous honors and awards,
including the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize and a U.S.
Congressional Gold Medal.
For more information about the Dalai Lama,
including his schedule of teachings, visit:
www.dalailama.com.

Howard C. Cutler, M.D., is a psychiatrist,
bestselling author, and speaker. He is coauthor
with His Holiness the Dalai Lama of the
acclaimed Art of Happiness series of books,
which have been translated into fifty languages

 and have appeared on bestseller lists around the
world. As a leading expert on the science of
human happiness and a pioneer in the field of
positive psychology, Dr. Cutler gives keynote
presentations, leads workshops, and teaches
courses on happiness throughout the world.
He is a diplomate of the American Board of
Psychiatry and Neurology and is on the editorial
board
of the American Journal of
Psychotherapy. Dr. Cutler has dedicated his life
to helping others find greater happiness,
fulfillment, and success. He lives in Phoenix.
For more information about The Art of
Happiness, including books, workshops, and
courses, or to contact Dr. Cutler, please visit:
www. theartofhappiness.com.

 1
The term Dharma has many connotations but no
precise English equivalent. It is most often used
to refer to the teachings and doctrine of the
Buddha, including the scriptural tradition as well
as the way of life and spiritual real izations that
result from the application of the teachings.
Sometimes Buddhists use the word in a more
general sense—to signify spiritual or religious
practices in general, universal spiritual law, or the
true nature of phenomena—and use the term
Buddhadharma to refer more specifically to the
principles and practices of the Buddhist path. The
Sanskrit word Dharma is derived from the
etymological root meaning “to hold,” and in this
context the word has a broader meaning: any
behavior or understanding that serves “to hold
one back” or protect one from experiencing

 suffering and its causes.
2
In Buddhist philosophy, “Buddha Nature” refers
to an underlying, basic, and most subtle nature of
mind. This state of mind, present in all human
beings, is completely untainted by negative
emotions or thoughts.
3
The Cabinet of the Tibetan government-in-exile.
4
Samsara (Skt.) is a state of existence
characterized by endless cycles of life, death, and
rebirth. This term also refers to our ordinary state
of day-to-day existence, which is characterized
by suffering. All beings remain in this state,
propelled by karmic imprints from past actions
and negative “delusory” states of mind, until one
removes all negative tendencies of mind and

 achieves a state of Liberation.
5
The Potala was the traditional winter palace of
the Dalai Lamas, and a symbol of the religious
and historical heritage of Tibet. Originally built by
the Tibetan King Song-tsen Gampo in the
seventh century, it was later destroyed and not
rebuilt until the seventeenth century by the fifth
Dalai Lama. The current structure rises a majestic
440 feet from the summit of the “Red Hill” in
Lhasa. It is over a quarter mile long, thirteen
stories high, and filled with over a thousand
chambers, assembly halls, shrines, and chapels.
6
In the Bodhisattva vow, the spiritual trainee
affirms his intention to become a Bodhisattva. A
Bodhisattva, literally translated as the “awakening
warrior,” is one who, out of love and

 compassion, has attained a realization of
Bodhicitta, a mental state characterized by the
spontaneous and genuine aspiration to attain full
Enlightenment in order to be of benefit to all
beings.

 