FOURTH EDITION
EDITORS

THEODORE M. ROBERSON, DDS
Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
HARALD 0. HEYMANN, DDS, MEd
Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
EDWARD J. SWIFT, JR., DMD, MS
Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

with 2521 illustrations

A Harcourt Health Sciences Company
St. Louis

London

Philadelphia

Sydney

Toronto

A Harcourt Health Sciences Company

Publishing Director: John Schrefer
Senior Acquisitions Editor: Penny Rudolph
Developmental Editor: Kimberly Alvis
Project Manager: Catherine Jackson
Production Editor: Clay S. Broeker
Designer: Amy Buxton

FOURTH EDITION
Copyright © 2002 by Mosby, Inc.
Previous editions copyrighted 1995 and 1985 by Mosby and 1968 by McGraw-Hill, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted, in any form or
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Permission to photocopy or reproduce solely for internal or personal use is permitted for libraries
or other users registered with the Copyright Clearance Center, provided that the base fee of $4.00
per chapter plus $.10 per page is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood
Drive, Danvers, Massachusetts 01923. This consent does not extend to other kinds of copying, such
as copying for general distribution, for advertising or promotional purposes, for creating new collected works, or for resale.
Mosby, Inc.
A Harcourt Health Sciences Company
11830 Westline Industrial Drive
St. Louis, Missouri 63146
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Sturdevant's art & science of operative dentistry-4th ed. / editors, Theodore M.
Roberson, Harald O. Heymann, Edward J. Swift, Jr.
p. ; cm.
Rev. ed. of: The art and science of operative dentistry / senior editor, Clifford M.
Sturdevant; co-editors, Theodore M. Roberson, Harald O. Heymann, John R. Sturdevant.
3rd ed. c1995.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-323-01087-3
1. Dentistry, Operative. I. Title: Sturdevant's art and science of operative dentistry. II.
Title: Art & science of operative dentistry. III. Roberson, Theodore M. IV Heymann,
Harald. V Swift, Edward J. VI. Sturdevant, Clifford M. VII. Art and science of operative
dentistry.
[DLNLM: 1. Dentistry, Operative. WU 300 S9351 2001]
RK501 .A78 2001
617.6'05-dc21
2001045250
02 03 04 05 06 GW/RRD-W 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Stephen C. Bayne, MS, PhD, FADM
Professor and Section Head of Biomaterials
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Andre V Ritter, DDS, MS
Assistant Professor and Assistant Graduate Program
Director
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

James J. Crawford, BA, MA, PhD
Professor Emeritus (Retired)
Department of Diagnostic Sciences and General
Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Theodore M. Roberson, DDS
Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Harald O. Heymann, DDS, MEd
Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Daniel A. Shugars, DDS, PhD, MPH
Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Ralph H. Leonard, Jr., DDS, MPH
Clinical Associate Professor
Department of Diagnostic Sciences and General
Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Diane C. Shugars, DDS, MPH, PhD
Associate Professor
Department of Dental Ecology
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Associate Professor
Department of Microbiology and Immunology
University of North Carolina
School of Medicine
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Thomas E. Lundeen, DMD
Private Practitioner
Durham, North Carolina

Troy B. Sluder, Jr., DDS, MS
Professor Emeritus (Retired)
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Kenneth N. May, Jr., DDS
Professor and Associate Dean of Administration and
Planning
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Gregory E. Smith, DDS, MSD
Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida

Jorge Perdigao, DDS, MS, PhD
Associate Professor and Director
Department of Restorative Sciences
Division of Operative Dentistry
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, Minnesota

John W. Stamm, DDS, DDPH, MScD
Professor and Dean
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Patricia N.R. Pereira, DDS, PhD
Assistant Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

v

Contributors

Clifford M. Sturdevant, DDS
Professor Emeritus (Retired)
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Duane E Taylor, BSE, MSE, PhD
Professor Emeritus (Retired)
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

John R. Sturdevant, DDS
Associate Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Jeffrey Y. Thompson, BS, PhD
Associate Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Edward J. Swift, Jr., DMD, MS
Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

Aldridge D. Wilder, Jr., DDS
Professor
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry
Chapel Hill, North Carolina

We dedicate this book to the betterment of operative dentistry. The central motivating factor of the authors and editors is to provide a book that is worthy for
use by our teaching colleagues. We sincerely hope that students present, past, and
future will benefit from these pages.
We also dedicate this edition to the authors and editors who have preceded us.
In particular, this textbook is dedicated to Dr. Cliff Sturdevant, the inspiration
and driving force for the first three editions. In recognition of his contributions,
we have changed the title to include his name.
We further dedicate this book to our spouses and families for their continual
love, understanding, and support during this revision.

The dental sciences are undergoing enormous changes,
and the field of operative dentistry is at the forefront of
that transformation. No dental educator can fail to notice that various restorative dental technologies, some
only 10 years old, are becoming obsolete, and that today's students and practitioners must incorporate new
and enhanced concepts into provision of the care that
patients require. This fourth edition textbook, now entitled Sturdevant's Art & Science of Operative Dentistry, is
an exemplary attempt to codify the principles of operative dentistry pertinent to the education and practice of
operative dentistry in the twenty-first century.
This book presents the science of operative dentistry in
an evolved yet highly dynamic fashion. At the University
of North Carolina, the operative dentistry discipline is
constantly tested and evaluated and is forced to meet the
challenge of pedagogical Darwinism. That is, the concepts that constitute operative dentistry practice are continually evaluated against the torrent of information
flowing from the basic and clinical sciences that shape
everything we do in the health care field. What is outdated is discarded, what remains applicable is updated,
and what is new and necessary is incorporated. Only the
best information and technologies survive to guide our
teaching and practice of operative dentistry. In this manner, this book contributes to evidence-based dentistry.
Dental caries is not a lesion-it is a disease. This book
is written with the explicit assumption that the disease
of dental caries must be thoroughly understood if efforts to prevent and treat it are to improve. Molecular
biology and new diagnostic technologies have so altered the field of cariology that its overview in the present volume is only cursory. The increasing ability to diagnostically measure earlier stages in the caries process
is leading to a redefinition of caries and is changing contemporary approaches to caries treatment. The choice
between surgical and nonsurgical caries treatment is becoming more complex.

During the last 20 years, dental caries prevalence and
severity have declined in most of the industrialized
world, yet significant population components have remained at high caries risk. Taking a more global perspective, it is known that dental caries prevalence is increasing in many industrializing countries. In many
highly populated, mid-tier countries, caries is still a
largely untreated condition. In all of these situations, the
challenges of caries treatment facing dental educators,
students, and practitioners are enormous and cannot be
overlooked. Sturdevant's Art & Science of Operative Dentistry is expressly written for the dental schools and offices that represent the loci for excellence in operative
dentistry in all of these settings.
Among the most illustrative examples of the continuing change facing the dental profession are the emergence of esthetic dentistry and the application of computer-aided design/computer-assisted manufacturing
(CAD/CAM) in dentistry. For operative dentistry, both
of these endeavors represent the pinnacle of high technology and convincingly demonstrate operative dentistry's skill in dealing with the larger issue of technology transfer into its discipline. I am particularly pleased
that the fourth edition of Sturdevant's Art & Science of Operative Dentistry appropriately emphasizes these developments within its pages. The authors of this textbook
have accumulated extensive knowledge and clinical experience pertaining to these evolving technologies, and
they give an excellent account of what will surely become an increasingly important component of operative
dentistry in the twenty-first century. Learn and enjoy as
much as I did from this outstanding textbook.
John W. Stamm, DDS
Professor and Dean
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry

ix

In 1961, Dr. Doug Strickland said, "Cliff, we should
write a textbook." Three days later, still trembling over
the immensity of such an endeavor, we agreed to give it
our best. Thus resulted the first edition, in 1968, of The
Art and Science of Operative Dentistry.
In 1994, dental educators and private practitioners had
available the third edition, which answered their earlier
query, "When will we see the next edition?" The appreciation of these colleagues is a major stimulus for the talented faculty of our department to persevere under the
hardships that accompany this extensive project. To have
constancy in a talented, dedicated "in-house" faculty (the
textbook contributors) is a blessing for any senior editor.

Dr. Theodore (Ted) Roberson is the senior editor of
this fourth edition. I am confident the users of this book
will value Dr. Ted's unique and blessed talents in organization, writing, vision, and leadership, as well as his
hard work and long hours.
Congratulations and thanks to the editors and
contributors.
Clifford (Cliff) Sturdevant
Chair, 1959-1979
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry

xi

Operative dentistry is a dynamic discipline. Many
changes in techniques, materials, and emphasis have occurred since the third edition of this textbook. The continued development, increased use, and recognized
benefit of bonding procedures are paramount and have
resulted in a new emphasis on, as well as techniques for,
such procedures. New information about cariology, infection control needs and procedures, diagnosis and
treatment planning, and adhesive dentistry is presented
in this edition, as is updated information about esthetic
restorations. Throughout the book, emphasis is maintained on the importance of treating the underlying
causes of the patient's problem(s), not just the restoration of the damage that has occurred.

physiology, occlusion, cariology, dental materials,
enamel and dentin adhesion, tooth preparation, instruments and equipment, and infection control.
The remaining chapters (9 through 21) are specifically related to the clinical practice of operative dentistry. These chapters present composite restorations
before amalgam restorations to reflect the University of
North Carolina's support of composite restorations in
many clinical applications. Each "technique" chapter is
presented in the same format, beginning with an introduction that presents the pertinent factors about the
restorative material being used; the indications, contraindications, advantages, and disadvantages of the
presented procedure; and finally the tooth preparation
factors and restorative factors that relate to the procedure. Common problems (with solutions) for the procedure are presented, as is a summary of the chapter.

NEW TO THIS EDITION
The fourth edition of The Art and Science of Operative Dentistry presents numerous changes. First, the title of the
book has been changed to Sturdevant's Art & Science of
Operative Dentistry to reflect Dr. Clifford M. Sturdevant's
relationship with this book for over 30 years. Without
Cliff Sturdevant, there would never have been a textbook, especially not one with this quality and reputation.
Almost all topics presented in the third edition are
still included. We have added five new chapters:

CHAPTER SYNOPSES
Chapter 1, Introduction to Operative Dentistry, emphasizes the biologic basis of operative dentistry and presents current statistics that demonstrate the continuing
need and demand for it.
Chapter 2, Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy,
Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion, is similar to the
same chapter in the last edition, presenting sections on
the pulp-dentin complex and occlusion. The presentation of occlusal relationships and chewing movements
should aid in the assessment of occlusion and the provision of acceptable occlusion in restorations.
Chapter 3, Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention,
and Control, has a different organization but still presents
the ecologic basis of caries and then deals with its management, which involves diagnosis, prevention, and
treatment. The caries control restoration is also described.
Chapter 4, Dental Materials, first presents a review of
materials science and biomechanics and then provides
updated information about direct and indirect restorative materials, including the safety and efficacy of their
use. The topics of composites, sealants, glass ionomers,
and amalgam materials have been expanded.
Chapter 5, Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and
Dentin Adhesion, is a new chapter authored by internationally recognized experts. Basic concepts of adhesion
are presented, followed by detailed descriptions of and
factors affecting enamel and dentin adhesion. Also included are sections on microleakage and biocompatibility. This chapter provides a firm scientific basis for the
use of adhesives in clinical operative procedures.
Chapter 6, Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation, presents the current nomenclature related to the preparation of teeth. It should be noted again that the term

Enamel and Dentin Adhesion
Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry
Introduction to Composite Restorations
Introduction to Amalgam Restorations
Indirect Tooth-Colored Classes I and 11 Restorations.
This edition includes more than 2500 illustrations,
with an increased number of color photographs and
color-enhanced drawings, diagrams, tables, and boxes.
This edition also uses different terminology. The term
cavity is used only in an historical context and is replaced by other terms such as carious lesion or tooth
preparation. This change reflects the continuing evolution of operative dentistry to represent treatment necessitated by many factors, not just caries. Also, the term
composite is used to refer to a variety of tooth-colored
materials that may be designated by composite-resin,
resin-based composite, or other terms in the literature. The
term amalgam is used instead of dental amalgam.

ORGANIZATION
The fourth edition benefits from an improved organizational format. The early chapters (1 through 8) present
general information necessary to understand the dynamics of operative dentistry. These chapters include introductions to operative dentistry, dental anatomy,
xiii

Preface

cavity preparation has been replaced by tooth preparation
for the reasons stated previously. Tooth preparation is
still presented as a two-stage (initial and final) procedure that is divided into a number of steps. The differences in tooth preparation for composite restorations
are expanded and emphasized. Current pulpal protection strategies are presented.
Chapter 7, Instruments and Equipment for Tooth
Preparation, provides similar information as that in the
third edition, with more emphasis and information
about diamond stones.
Chapter 8, Infection Control, reviews the exposure
risks associated with dental practice and presents current
information for federal, state, and OSHA regulations. The
chapter emphasizes the importance of appropriate infection control procedures. Expanded sections are presented
on dental office water lines and handpiece sterilization.
Chapter 9, Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning, provides an excellent
reference for practitioners and students. Patient assessment is presented, emphasizing the importance of a
medical review that includes relevant factors of systemic and communicable diseases. Photographs of
some of these oral manifestations are presented in a
color insert. Factors affecting the determination of clinical treatment are covered, with special emphasis on indications for operative treatment, including the decision
to replace existing restorations.
Chapter 10, Preliminary Considerations for Operative
Dentistry, combines information from several chapters
from the third edition. The sections on local anesthesia
and isolation of the operating site have been updated.
Patient and operator positioning, instrument exchange,
and magnification are also part of this chapter.
Chapter 11, Introduction to Composite Restorations, is
a new chapter that provides an overview of the composite restoration technique. It reviews the types of esthetic
materials available, emphasizing the properties of composite. Additional information about polymerization of
composites is presented. (Some of this information is also
included in Chapter 6). Indications, contraindications, advantages, and disadvantages of composite restorations
are detailed, often with some comparison to amalgam
restorations. Expanded information is provided on the
techniques of tooth preparation for composite restorations; this information recognizes the more conservative
removal of tooth structure necessary for composite preparations as compared with amalgam preparations. The
restorative technique necessary when using composite is
reviewed in a general format. Both the tooth preparation
and the restoration techniques provide the basis for the
more specific information about composite restorations
presented in Chapters 12 through 15. This chapter also includes sections on both the repair of composite restorations and common problems (and solutions) that may be
encountered with composite restorations.

Chapter 12, Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite
and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations, presents thorough coverage of the specific rationale and technique
for use of composite in these locations. There are also
sections on microfill composite and glass-ionomer
restorations.
Chapter 13, Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite
and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations, provides an expanded emphasis for the use of composite in posterior
teeth. The rationale and technique for use of composite
in Class I and II restorations is covered in more detail
and a new section on the use of composite for extensive Class II and foundation restorations is included.
Chapter 14, Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored
Restorations, is a new chapter that presents both material formerly presented in another third-edition chapter and also new material. The chapter includes expanded coverage of the indirect techniques and the
various materials and methods available. Information
about indirect restorations of composite, feldspathic
porcelain, pressed glass ceramics, and CAD/CAM are
covered. Another section discusses common problems
and solutions.
Chapter 15, Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures, provides an excellent resource for many esthetic
procedures. After reviewing the factors for artistic success, the chapter presents detailed techniques for esthetic contouring and enhancements, bleaching, veneers, splinting, and conservative bonded bridges.
These procedures are well supplemented with many illustrations, most of which are in color.
Chapter 16, Introduction to Amalgam Restorations, is
a new chapter that presents fundamental concepts for
amalgam restorations. The material qualities of amalgam as a restorative material are identified, followed by
sections on the indications, contraindications, advantages, and disadvantages for amalgam restorations. The
use of amalgam is still recommended, but emphasis is
placed on its use for larger restorations, especially in
nonesthetic areas. Fundamental concepts of both amalgam tooth preparations and restoration techniques are
included, and these are expanded upon in Chapters 17
through 19. Also included in this chapter are sections on
common problems (and solutions), repairs, and controversial issues.
Chapter 17, Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations,
combines several chapters from the third edition. Greater
emphasis is placed on the use of amalgam in large Class
I and Class II restorations, with smaller restorations recommended for the use of composite instead. However,
smaller amalgam restorations are presented, primarily to
serve as a method of presenting the fundamental concepts associated with larger amalgam restoration techniques. The bonding of amalgam restorations is presented in detail, and although the text does not promote
the bonding of all amalgam restorations, this chapter

Preface

provides the fundamental techniques of appropriate
bonded amalgam restorations.
Chapter 18, Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations,
presents the rationale and techniques for these restorations. The use of Class IV amalgam restorations has
been deleted and the indications for Class III restorations minimized.
Chapter 19, Complex Amalgam Restorations, details
the use of amalgam for very large restorations (including foundations), presenting the use of pins, slots, and
bonding techniques. (Discussion of the use of slots is increased from the previous edition.)
Chapter 20, Class II Cast Metal Restorations, provides
thorough coverage of the entire cast metal restoration pro-

cedure. Although similar to the chapter in the third edition, this chapter provides new information on impression, temporary, and working model procedures. The procedures are well documented, with many illustrations.
Finally, Chapter 21, Direct Gold Restorations, provides
an update on gold foil restorations for Classes I, III, and V
Theodore M. Roberson, Chair, 1979-1988
Harald O. Heymann, Chair, 1988-2000
Edward J. Swift, Jr., Chair, 2000-present
Department of Operative Dentistry
University of North Carolina
School of Dentistry

In addition to teaching operative dentistry, the authors
practice the principles and techniques presented in this
book in a clinical setting and engage in clinical or laboratory research. Thus the restorative concepts presented here
are supported by both clinical activity and research results.
The editors express special appreciation to the
following:

tended to Ms. Roberts for her vital role in organizing the revision effort and communicating with the
publisher.
Drs. Roger Barton, Tom Lundeen, Ken May, Troy
Sluder, Lee Sockwell, Doug Strickland, Cliff
Sturdevant, Duane Taylor, and Van Haywood,
who, while inactive in this edition, have provided
information still present in the fourth edition. We
are grateful for their past contributions.
Penny Rudolph and Kimberly Alvis at Harcourt
Health Sciences for their constant support, encouragement, and expertise during the revision process.
Their guidance and ideas provided increased professional appeal for the book, both in its appearance and its content.

Warren McCollum, Director of the Learning Resources Center of the UNC School of Dentistry,
and his staff for their diligence in production of
illustrations.
Marie Roberts, Paulette Pauley, and Shannon Veccia for their capable assistance in manuscript
preparation. In particular, a special thanks is ex-

xvii

Tooth Contacts During Mandibular Movements, 5
Neurologic Correlates and Control of
Mastication, 61

I n t r o d uc t i o n to O p e r a t i v e
Dentistry,
THEODORE M.ROBERSON

DEFINITION AND HISTORY, 3

Cariology: T h e Lesion, Etiology,
Prevention, and Control, 63

Definition, 3
History, 3

THEODORE M.ROBERSON
THOMAS F. LUNDEEN'

FACTORS AFFECTING OPERATIVE
TREATMENT, 3
Indications, 3
Considerations, 4
Conservative Approach. 4
Dynamics of Operative Dentistry, 4

NTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS, 65
Definitions of Caries and Plaque, 66
Epidemiology of Caries, 67
Hypotheses Concerning the Etiology of Caries, 6
Ecologic Basis of Caries, 69
ETIOLOGIC AGENT OF CARIES:
PATHOGENIC BACTERIAL PLAQUE, 69
ntroductory Description of Plaque, 69
Plaque Communities and Habitats, 72
Development of Bacterial Plaque: an Ecologic
Phenomenon, 74
Pathophysiology of Caries, 90

FACTORS AFFECTING THE FUTURE DEMAND
FOR OPERATIVE DENTISTRY, 5
Demographics, 5
Economic Factors, 5
General and Dental Health of the
U.S. Population, 6
Dental Manpower, 8
Projected Need for Operative Dentistry, S
Public's Perception of Dentistry, 9
Patient Visits, 9
FUTURE OF OPERATIVE DENTISTRY, 9
SUMMARY, 10

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE
LESION, 90
Clinical Sites for Caries Initiation, 91
Progression of Carious Lesions, 92
HISTOPATHOLOGY OF CARIES, 92
Enamel Caries, 92

2 Clinical Significance of Dental
Anatomy, Histology, Physiology,
and Occlusion, 13
JOHN

R.

THOMAS

Dentinal Caries, 95
Advanced Carious Lesions, 99
MANAGEMENT OF CARIES, 101

STURDEVANT
F

CARIES DIAGNOSIS, 102

LUNDEEN -

TROY B. SLUDER, JR,TEETH

Assessment Tools, 102
Caries Diagnosis for Pits and Fissures, 104
Caries Diagnosis for Smooth Surfaces, 105
Caries Diagnosis for Root Surfaces, 107
Caries Activity Tests, 109

AND INVESTING TISSUES, 15

Dentitions,l 5
Classes of Human Teeth: Form and Function, 15
Structures of the Teeth, 16
Physiology of Tooth Form, 32
Maxilla and Mandible, 35
Oral Mucosa, 35
Periodontium, 36
OCCLUSION, 37

CARIES PREVENTION, 109
General Health, 110
Fluoride Exposure, 110
mmunization, 112
Salivary Functioning, 112
Antimicrobial Agents, 113
Diet, 113
Oral Hygiene, 114
Xylitol Gums, 121

General Description, 38
Mechanics of Mandibular Motion, 45
Capacity of Motion of the Mandible, 48
Articulators and Mandibular Movements, 55

xix

Contents

ADVANTAGES OF ENAMEL
ADHESION, 238

Pit-and-Fissure Sealants, 121
Restorations, 1 23

ENAMEL ADHESION, 238

CARIES TREATMENT, 124

DENTIN ADHESION, 239

Caries Control Restoration, 1 26

Challenges in Dentin Bonding, 240

SUMMARY, 130

Development of Dentin Bonding Systems, 244
Dental Materials, 1 33
STEPHEN C. BAYNE
JEFFREY Y. THOMPSON
DUANE F. TAYLOR*

Role of the Hybrid Layer, 250

REVIEW OF MATERIALS SCIENCE
DEFINITIONS, 135

Biocompatibility, 255

Moist Versus Dry Dentin Surfaces, 251
Role of Proteins in Dentin Bonding, 254
Microleakage, 254
Relevance of In Vitro Studies, 256

Material Categories, 1 35
Material Structure, 137

Clinical Factors in Dentin Adhesion, 257
New Clinical Indications for Dentin Adhesives, 258

Material Properties, 137
BIOMECHANICS FOR RESTORATIVE
DENTISTRY, 145
Biomechanical Unit, 1 45
Stress Transfer, 1 46
Strain Within Tooth Structure (Tooth Flexure), 1 46
Effects of Aging, 1 46
Principles of Biomechanics, 1 48
DIRECT RESTORATIVE DENTAL
MATERIALS, 148
Amalgam, 1 48
Liners and Bases, 1 70
Dental Adhesion, 1 77
Pit-and-Fissure Sealants, 1 87
Composites, 1 90

SUMMARY, 261

6

Fundamentals in Tooth
Preparation, 269
THEODORE M. ROBERSON
CLIFFORD M. STURDEVANT*
DEFINITION OF TOOTH
PREPARATION, 271
NEED FOR RESTORATIONS, 271
OBJECTIVES OF TOOTH
PREPARATION, 271
STAGES AND STEPS OF TOOTH
PREPARATION, 272
FACTORS AFFECTING TOOTH
PREPARATION, 273

Glass lonomers, 207

General Factors, 273

Direct-Filling Gold, 211

Conservation of Tooth Structure, 274

I NDIRECT RESTORATIVE DENTAL
MATERIALS, 212
I mpression Materials, 212
Cast Metal Restorations, 214

Restorative Material Factors, 274
NOMENCLATURE, 274
Caries Terminology, 274

Dental Cements, 217

Noncarious Tooth Defects Terminology, 278
Tooth Preparation Terminology, 279

Machined Restorations, 220

Classification of Tooth Preparations, 281

SAFETY AND EFFICACY, 224
Standards Programs, 224
Safety for Dental Professionals, 226

I NITIAL AND FINAL STAGES OF
PREPARATION, 283
I nitial Tooth Preparation Stage, 285
Final Tooth Preparation Stage, 294

Fundamental Concepts of
Enamel and Dentin Adhesion, 235
JORGE PERDIGAO
EDWARD J. SWIFT, JR.
BASIC CONCEPTS OF ADHESION, 237
RECENT TRENDS IN RESTORATIVE
DENTISTRY, 237

ADDITIONAL CONCEPTS IN TOOTH
PREPARATION, 303
Amalgam Restorations, 303
Composite Restorations, 303
Bonded Restorations Strengthen Weakened
Tooth Structure, 304
SUMMARY, 305

Contents

I nstruments and Equipment
for Tooth Preparation, 307
STEPHEN C. BAYNE

FEDERAL AND STATE REGULATIONS
TO REDUCE EXPOSURE RISKS FROM
PATHOGENS IN BLOOD AND OTHER
SOURCES OF INFECTION, 350

JEFFREY Y. THOMPSON
CLIFFORD M. STURDEVANT*
DUANE F. TAYLOR*

HAND INSTRUMENTS FOR CUTTING, 309
Materials, 309
Terminology and Classification, 310
Cutting Instrument Applications, 314
Hand Instrument Techniques, 315
Sharpening Hand Instruments, 316
Sterilization and Storage of Hand Cutting
I nstruments, 322
POWERED CUTTING EQUIPMENT, 322
Development of Rotary Equipment, 322
Rotary Speed Ranges, 324
Laser Equipment, 325
Other Equipment, 327
ROTARY CUTTING INSTRUMENTS, 329

Preparing a Written OSHA Office Exposure
Control Plan (Summary), 351
Regulations of Other Agencies, 355
Regulation of Infected Health Care Personnel, 355
OSHA-REQUIRED TRAINING ON
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS, 356
AIDS/HIV Infection, 356
HIV Epidemiology and Transmission, 356
Progression of HIV Infection Into AIDS, 356
Symptoms and Oral Manifestations, 357
Serology of HIV Infection, 357
HIV Risks for Clinical Personnel, 357
HIV Risks for Dental Patients, 358
HIV Data Related to Infection Control, 358
VIRAL HEPATITIS: AGENTS,
EPIDEMIOLOGY, AND INFECTION, 358

Common Design Characteristics, 329

Viral Hepatitis Infection, Symptoms, and Clinical
Findings, 359

Dental Burs, 330

Transmission of Viral Hepatitis, 359

Diamond Abrasive Instruments, 336

I nfection risks for Personnel from Hepatitis B
and C Viruses, 359

Other Abrasive Instruments, 338
CUTTING MECHANISMS, 340
Evaluation of Cutting, 340
Bladed Cutting, 340
Abrasive Cutting, 341
Cutting Recommendations, 341
HAZARDS WITH CUTTING
I NSTRUMENTS, 342
Pulpal Precautions, 342
Soft Tissue Precautions, 342
Eye Precautions, 343
Ear Precautions, 343
I nhalation Precautions, 343
I nfection Control, 345
JAMES J. CRAWFORD
RALPH H. LEONARD, JR.

EXPOSURE RISKS AND EFFECT OF
I NFECTIONS ON DENTISTRY, 347
Environment of the Dental Operatory, 347
I mpact of Hepatitis B, 349
I mpact of HIV and AIDS, 350

Serologic Tests Related to Hepatitis A, B,
and C, 360
Data Related to Control of Hepatitis B, 360
I mmunization Against Hepatitis A, B, and C, 360
Tests for Hepatitis B Antibody and Boosters, 360
EPIDEMIOLOGY OF OTHER INFECTION
RISKS, 361
EXPOSURE ASSESSMENT
PROTOCOL, 361
Medical History, 362
Personal Barrier Protection, 362
Disposal of Clinical Waste, 364
Needle Disposal, 364
Precautions to Avoid Injury Exposure, 364
OVERVIEW OF ASEPTIC
TECHNIQUES, 364
Operatory Asepsis, 365
Procedures, Materials, and Devices for Cleaning
I nstruments Before Sterilization, 369
STERILIZATION, 371
Steam Pressure Sterilization (Autoclaving), 372
Chemical Vapor Pressure Sterilization
( Chemiclaving), 373
Dry Heat Sterilization, 373
Ethylene Oxide Sterilization, 374

Contents

Advantages, 482
Disadvantages, 483
CLINICAL TECHNIQUE, 483
Initial Clinical Procedures, 483
Tooth Preparation for Composite Restorations, 486
Restorative Technique for Composite
Restorations, 492
Repairing Composite Restorations, 497
COMMON PROBLEMS: CAUSES
AND POTENTIAL SOLUTIONS, 497
Poor isolation of the Operating Area, 497
White Line or Halo Around the Enamel
Margin, 497
Voids, 498
Weak or Missing Proximal Contacts (Classes II,
III, and IV), 498
Incorrect Shade, 498
Poor Retention, 498
Contouring and Finishing Problems, 498
CONTROVERSIAL ISSUES, 498
Liners and Bases Under Composite
Restorations, 499
Retention in Class V Root-Surface
Preparations, 499
Wear Problems, 499
Gap Formation Significance, 499
SUMMARY, 499
12 Classes III, IV, and V Direct
Composite and Other ToothColored Restorations, 501
THEODORE M. ROBERSON

HARALD 0. HEYMANN
ANORE V. RITTER
PATRICIA N.R. PEREIRA
CLASSES III, IV, AND V DIRECT
COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS, 503

Pertinent Material Qualities and Properties, 503
Indications, 503
Contraindications, 503
Advantages, 504
Disadvantages, 504
CLINICAL TECHNIQUE FOR
DIRECT CLASS III COMPOSITE
RESTORATIONS, 504
I nitial Clinical Procedures, 504
Tooth Preparation, 504
Restorative Technique, 514

CLINICAL TECHNIQUE FOR
DIRECT CLASS IV COMPOSITE
RESTORATIONS, 523
Initial Clinical Procedures, 523
Tooth Preparation, 523
Restorative Technique, 526
CLINICAL TECHNIQUE FOR CLASS V
COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS, 528
Initial Clinical Procedures, 528
Tooth Preparation, 528
Restorative Technique, 533
MICROFILL COMPOSITE
RESTORATIONS, 534
Clinical Technique, 534
GLASS-IONOMER RESTORATIONS, 535
Clinical Technique, 535
SUMMARY, 536

13 Classes I, 11, and VI Direct
Composite and Other ToothColored Restorations, 537
THEODORE M. ROBERSON
HARALD 0. HEYMANN
ANDRE V. RITTER

PATRICIA N. R. PEREIRA
CLASSES I, 11, AND VI COMPOSITE
RESTORATIONS, 539
Pertinent Material Qualities and
Properties, 539
I ndications, 539
Contraindications, 539
Advantages, 540
Disadvantages, 540
PIT-AND-FISSURE SEALANTS,

PREVENTIVE RESIN AND
CONSERVATIVE COMPOSITE
RESTORATIONS, AND CLASS VI
COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS, 540

Pit-and-Fissure Sealants, 541
Conservative Composite and Preventive Resin
Restorations, 542
Class VI Composite Restorations, 543
CLINICAL TECHNIQUE FOR
DIRECT CLASS I COMPOSITE
RESTORATIONS, 544
Initial Clinical Procedures, 544
Tooth Preparation, 544
Restorative Technique, 548

Contents

CONSERVATIVE ALTERATIONS
OF TOOTH CONTOURS
AND CONTACTS, 599

CLINICAL TECHNIQUE FOR
DIRECT CLASS II COMPOSITE
RESTORATIONS, 550
I nitial Clinical Procedures, 550

Alterations of Shape of Natural Teeth, 599

Tooth Preparation, 551

Alterations of Embrasures, 601

Restorative Technique, 558

Correction of Diastemas, 601

CLINICAL TECHNIQUE FOR EXTENSIVE
CLASS II COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS
AND FOUNDATIONS, 563

CONSERVATIVE TREATMENTS FOR
DISCOLORED TEETH, 605
Extrinsic Discolorations, 605

Clinical Technique, 564

I ntrinsic Discolorations, 606

SUMMARY, 567

14

BLEACHING TREATMENTS, 608
Nonvital Bleaching Procedures, 608

Classes I and II Indirect ToothColored Restorations, 569
EDWARD J. SWIFT, JR.
JOHN R. STURDEVANT
ANDRE V. RITTER

Vital Bleaching Procedures, 609
MICROABRASION AND
MACROABRASION, 612
Microabrasion, 612
Macroabrasion, 613

CLASSES I AND II INDIRECT
RESTORATIONS, 571

VENEERS, 615

I ndications, 571
Contraindications, 571

Direct Veneer Techniques, 617
I ndirect Veneer Techniques, 620

Advantages, 571

Veneers for Metal Restorations, 628

Disadvantages, 572

Repairs of Veneers, 630

Laboratory-Processed Composite Inlays and
Onlays, 573

ACID-ETCHED, RESIN-BONDED
SPLINTS, 632

Ceramic Inlays and Onlays, 574

Periodontally Involved Teeth, 632

CLINICAL PROCEDURES, 579
Tooth Preparation, 579

Stabilization of Teeth After Orthodontic
Treatment, 634

I mpression, 581

Avulsed or Partially Avulsed Teeth, 635

Temporary Restoration, 582
CAD/CAM Techniques, 582

CONSERVATIVE BRIDGES, 636
Natural Tooth Pontic, 636

Try-In and Cementation, 583

Denture Tooth Pontic, 638

Finishing and Polishing Procedures, 584

Porcelain-Fused-to-Metal Pontic or All-Metal
Pontic with Metal Retainers, 640

Clinical Procedures for CAD/CAM Inlays and
Onlays, 587

All-Porcelain Pontic, 646

Common Problems and Solutions, 587
Repair of Tooth-Colored Inlays and Onlays, 588
SUMMARY, 589

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic
Procedures, 591
HARALD 0. HEYMANN
ARTISTIC ELEMENTS, 593

16

I ntroduction to Amalgam
Restorations, 651
THEODORE M. ROBERSON
HARALD 0. HEYMANN
ANDRE V. RITTER
AMALGAM, 653
History, 653

Symmetry and Proportionality, 595

Current Status, 653
Types of Amalgam Restorative Materials, 653

Position and Alignment, 596

I mportant Properties, 654

Surface Texture, 597

Amalgam Restorations, 654

Color, 597

Uses, 655

Translucency, 598

Handling, 656

Shape or Form, 594

Clinical Considerations, 599

Contents

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR
AMALGAM RESTORATIONS, 656

Restorative Technique, 717
Quadrant Dentistry, 735

I ndications, 656

CLASS VI AMALGAM
RESTORATIONS, 736

Contraindications, 657
Advantages, 658

SUMMARY, 737

Disadvantages, 658
CLINICAL TECHNIQUE, 658

18

I nitial Clinical Procedures, 658
Tooth Preparation for Amalgam Restorations, 658

Classes III and V Amalgam
Restorations, 741
ALDRIDGE D. WILDER, JR.
THEODORE M. ROBERSON
ANDRE V. RITTER
KENNETH N. MAY, JR.*

Restorative Technique for Amalgam
Restorations, 664
COMMON PROBLEMS: CAUSES AND
POTENTIAL SOLUTIONS, 667

CLASSES III AND V AMALGAM
RESTORATIONS, 743

Postoperative Sensitivity, 667
Pertinent Material Qualities and Properties, 743

Marginal Voids, 667

I ndications, 743

Marginal Ridge Fractures, 667

Contraindications, 744

Amalgam Scrap and Mercury Collection and
Disposal, 667

Advantages, 745
Disadvantages, 745

CONTROVERSIAL ISSUES, 667

CLINICAL TECHNIQUE FOR CLASS III
AMALGAM RESTORATIONS, 745

Amalgam Restoration Safety, 667
Spherical or Admixed Amalgam, 667

I nitial Procedures, 745

Bonded Amalgam Restorations, 667

Tooth Preparation, 745

Proximal Retention Locks, 668

Restorative Technique, 752

SUMMARY, 668

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam
Restorations, 669
ALDRIDGE D. WILDER, JR.
THEODORE M. ROBERSON
PATRICIA N.R. PEREIRA
ANDRE V. RITTER
KENNETH N. MAY, JR.I NTRODUCTION TO CLASSES I, II, AND
VI AMALGAM RESTORATIONS, 671
Pertinent Material Qualities and Properties, 671
I ndications, 671
Contraindications, 671

CLINICAL TECHNIQUE FOR CLASS V
AMALGAM RESTORATIONS, 754
I nitial Procedures, 754
Tooth Preparation, 755
Restorative Technique, 758

19

Complex Amalgam
Restorations, 763
ALDRIDGE D. WILDER, JR.
ANDRE V. RITTER
THEODORE M. ROBERSON
KENNETH N. MAY, JR.*
I NTRODUCTION, 765

Advantages, 671

Pertinent Material Qualities and Properties, 765

Disadvantages, 672

I ndications, 765

CLINICAL TECHNIQUE FOR CLASS I
AMALGAM RESTORATIONS, 672
Conservative Class I Amalgam Restorations, 672
Extensive Class I Amalgam Restorations, 687

Contraindications, 766
Advantages, 766
Disadvantages, 766
CLINICAL TECHNIQUE, 766

Class I Occlusolingual Amalgam Restorations, 690

I nitial Procedures Summary, 766

Class I Occlusofacial Amalgam Restorations, 695

Tooth Preparation, 769

CLASS II AMALGAM
RESTORATIONS, 696
I nitial Clinical Procedures, 696
Tooth Preparation, 697

Restorative Technique, 787
SUMMARY, 795

Contents

20

Class II Cast Metal
Restorations, 799
JOHN R. STURDEVANT
CLIFFORD M. STURDEVANT"

I NTRODUCTION, 801
Material Qualities, 801
I ndications, 801
Contraindications, 801
Advantages, 802
Disadvantages, 802
I nitial Procedures, 802
TOOTH PREPARATION FOR CLASS 11
CAST METAL RESTORATIONS, 803
Tooth Preparation for Class II Cast Metal
I nlays, 803

21

Direct Gold Restorations, 871
GREGORY E. SMITH

DIRECT GOLDS AND PRINCIPLES OF
MANIPULATION, 873
Materials and Manufacture, 873
Cohesion and Degassing, 874
Principles of Compaction, 874
Compaction Technique for Gold Foil, 876
Compaction Technique for E-Z Gold, 877
PRINCIPLES OF TOOTH PREPARATION
FOR DIRECT GOLD RESTORATIONS, 877
Fundamentals of Tooth Preparation, 877
I ndications and Contraindications, 878
TOOTH PREPARATIONS AND
RESTORATIONS, 878

Tooth Preparation for Cast Metal Onlays, 826

Class I Tooth Preparation and Restoration, 878

RESTORATIVE TECHNIQUES FOR CAST
METAL RESTORATIONS, 837

Class V Tooth Preparation and Restoration, 880

I nterocclusal Records, 837
Temporary Restoration, 837
Final Impression, 843
Working Casts and Dies, 846
Wax Patterns, 853
Spruing, Investing, and Casting, 856
Seating, Adjusting, and Polishing the Casting,
856
Trying-in the Casting, 858
Cementation, 866
Repair, 866
SUMMARY, 867

"These authors are inactive this edition. See the Acknowledgments.

Class III Tooth Preparation and Restoration, 889
SUMMARY, 898

I.
II.

III.

Definition and history, 3
A. Definition, 3
B. History, 3
Factors affecting operative treatment, 3
A. Indications, 3
B. Considerations, 4
C. Conservative approach, 4
D. Dynamics of operative dentistry, 4
Factors affecting the future demand for operative
dentistry, 5
A. Demographics, 5
B. Economic factors, 5
I V.
V.

2

C. General and dental health of the U.S.
population, 6
1. General health, 6
2. Dental health, 6
D. Dental manpower, 8
E. Projected need for operative dentistry, 8
1. New caries, 8
2. Root caries, 8
3. Replacement restorations, 8
4. Esthetic restorations, 8
F Public's perception of dentistry, 9
G. Patient visits, 9
Future of operative dentistry, 9
Summary, 10

CHAPTER

DEFINITION AND HISTORY
DEFINITION
Operative dentistry is the art and science of the diagnosis,
treatment, and prognosis of defects of teeth that do not require
full coverage restorations for correction. Such treatment
should result in the restoration of proper tooth form, function,
and esthetics while maintaining the physiologic integrity of
the teeth in harmonious relationship with the adjacent hard
and soft tissues, all of which should enhance the general
health and welfare of the patient.

HISTORY
Although operative dentistry was once considered to be the
entirety of the clinical practice of dentistry, today many of
the areas previously included under operative dentistry
have become specialty areas. As information increased
and the need for other complex treatments was recognized, areas such as endodontics, prosthodontics, and
orthodontics became dental specialties. However, operative dentistry is still recognized as the foundation of
dentistry and the base from which most other aspects of
dentistry evolved.
In the United States, dentistry originated in the seventeenth century when several "barber-dentists" were
sent from England. The practice of these early dentists
consisted mainly of tooth extractions because dental
caries at that time was considered a "gangrene-like" disease. Many practiced dentistry while pursuing other
livelihoods, and some traveled from one area to another
to provide their dental services. These early dentists
learned their trade by serving apprenticeships under
more experienced practitioners. Later, it became known
that treatment of the defective part of a tooth (the "cavity") could occur by removal of the cavity and replacement of the missing tooth structure by "filling" the cavity with some type of material. Much of the knowledge
and many of the techniques for the first successful tooth
restorations were developed in the United States. However, much of the practice of dentistry during the founding years of this country was not based on scientific
knowledge, and disputes often arose regarding treatment
techniques and materials. One such dispute concerning
the use of amalgam as a restorative material played a part
in the establishment of the Baltimore College of Dental
Surgery in 1840, 37 which marked the official birth of formal dental education as a discipline. In 1867, Harvard
University established the first university-affiliated dental program 29
It was in this same period in France that Louis Pasteur
discovered the role of microorganisms in disease, 5 a
finding that would have a significant effect on the developing dental and medical professions. Also, in the
United States during this time, contributions by G.V.
Black8 became the foundation of the dental profession.
Black, who had both honorary dental and honorary
medical degrees, related the clinical practice of dentistry to

I ntroduction to Operative Dentistry

a scientific basis. This scientific foundation for operative
dentistry was further expanded by Black's son, Arthur.
Studies commissioned by the Carnegie Foundation; the
Flexner report22 in 1910; and the Gies report22 in 1926
further identified the need for establishing dental and
medical educational systems on a firm scientific foundation. The primary needs reported by these studies
were relating clinical practice to the basic sciences, prescribing admissions and curriculum criteria, and promoting university-based programs.
Thus the early days of itinerant, and frequently uneducated, dentists ended. Dentists began to be educated in
the basic sciences as well as clinical dentistry, resulting
in practitioners who possessed and demonstrated intellectual and scientific curiosity. The heritage of operative
dentistry is filled with such practitioners. In addition to
the Blacks, others such as Charles E. Woodbury, E.K.
Wedelstaedt, Waldon 1. Ferrier, and George Hollenback
made significant contributions to the early development
of operative dentistry.
Although segments of what constituted early operative dentistry have now branched into dental specialties, operative dentistry continues to be a major part of
most dental practices,4
and the demand for it will
not decrease in the foreseeable future. 48 However, the
number of restorative services provided by U.S. dentists
did decline from 233 million in 1979 to 202 million in
1990.42 Also, the percentage of weekly time spent on operative procedures decreased from 38% in 1981 to 31%
in 1993. 4.2 These changes have occurred because of
greater emphasis by dentists to increase the number of
preventive and diagnostic services, and this increased
focus on prevention and diagnosis is represented in this
textbook.
The contributions of many practitioners, educators,
and researchers throughout the world have resulted in
operative dentistry being recognized today as a scientifically based discipline that plays an important role in enhancing dental health. No longer is operative dentistry
considered only the treatment of "cavities" with "fillings." Modem operative dentistry includes the diagnosis and treatment of many problems-not just caries. Because the scope of operative dentistry has extended far
beyond the treatment of caries, the term "cavity" is no
longer used in this textbook to describe the preparation
of a tooth to receive a restorative material. Instead, mechanical alterations to a tooth as part of a restorative procedure will be referred to as the "tooth preparation."

FACTORS AFFECTING
OPERATIVE TREATMENT
INDICATIONS
The indications for operative procedures are numerous.
However, they can be categorized into three primary
treatment needs: (1) caries; (2) malformed, discolored,

CHAPTER I

I ntroduction to Operative Dentistry

nonesthetic, or fractured teeth; and (3) restoration replacement or repair. The specific procedures associated
with these treatment indicators are covered in subsequent chapters.
CONSIDERATIONS
Before any operative treatment, a number of considerations are involved, including: (1) an understanding of
and appreciation for infection control to safeguard both
health service personnel and patients (see Chapter 8); (2) a
thorough examination of not only the affected tooth but
also the oral and systemic health of the patient; (3) a diagnosis of the dental problem that recognizes the interaction of the affected area with other body tissues; (4) a
treatment plan that has the potential to return the affected area to a state of health and function, thereby enhancing the overall health and well-being of the patient;
(5) an understanding of the material to be used to restore
the affected area to a state of health and function, including a realization of both the material's limitations and
techniques involved in using it; (6) an understanding of
the oral environment into which the restoration will be
placed; (7) the biologic knowledge necessary to make the
previously mentioned determinations; (8) an understanding of the biologic basis and function of the various
tooth components and supporting tissues; (9) an appreciation for and knowledge of correct dental anatomy; and
(10) the effect of the operative procedure on other dental
treatments. Subsequent chapters amplify these factors in
relation to specific operative procedures.
In summary, the placement of a restoration in a tooth
requires the dentist to practice applied human biology
and microbiology, use principles of mechanical engineering, possess highly developed technical skills, and
demonstrate artistic abilities.
CONSERVATIVE APPROACH
Although tooth preparations for operative procedures
originally adhered to the concept of "extension for prevention," increased knowledge of prevention methods,
advanced clinical techniques, and improved restorative
materials have now provided a more conservative approach to the restoration of teeth. This newer approach
is a result of the reduction in caries incidence because of
increased knowledge about caries, increased preventive
emphasis, use of multiple fluoride applications, and
proper sealant application.
Ongoing research efforts in operative dentistry have
provided other benefits. For example, high-copper amalgam restorations demonstrate significant improvements
in early strength, corrosion resistance, marginal integrity,
and longevity than traditional amalgams. In addition,
the bonding of materials to tooth structure has made
possible dramatic improvements in composite, ceramic,
and glass ionomer restorations and the development of
expanded restorative applications of these materials.

More conservative approaches are now available for:
(1) many typical restorative procedures (Classes I, II, III,
IV, and V); (2) diastema closure procedure; (3) esthetic
and/or functional correction of malformed, discolored,
or fractured teeth; and (4) actual replacement of teeth.
When compared with past treatment modalities, these
newer approaches result in significantly less removal of
tooth structure.
Although these are only examples, they demonstrate
the current emphasis on conservation of tooth structure.
The primary results of conservative treatment are retention of
more intact tooth structure and less trauma to the pulp tissue
and contiguous soft tissue. Not only will the remaining
tooth structure be stronger, but the restoration should
be more easily retained, offer greater esthetic potential,
and cause less alteration in intea-arch and inter-arch
relationships.
Efforts for the conservative restoration of teeth are ongoing. Research activity is continuing toward the development of materials and techniques to completely bond
restorative materials to tooth structure, the objectives
being to: (1) significantly reduce the necessity for extensive tooth preparations; (2) strengthen the remaining
tooth structure; and (3) provide benefits such as less microleakage, less recurrent caries, and increased retention
of the material within the tooth. These efforts will ultimately benefit the oral health of the public.
DYNAMICS OF OPERATIVE DENTISTRY
In the future, advances in treatment techniques,
philosophies, and materials almost certainly will be
made, just as in the past several decades, technological
and scientific advances have dramatically affected the
need for, demand for, and delivery of restorative services. These past (and future) developments illustrate
the dynamics of operative dentistry, a constantly changing and advancing discipline.
The development of the high-speed handpiece played a
dramatic role in the more conservative and efficient removal of tooth structure for restorative procedures. The
use of high-speed instrumentation, along with the acknowledged benefits of water coolants, also led to the
concept of four-handed dentistry. Major changes in operatory equipment design followed, resulting in a more
comfortable, efficient, and productive setting for the delivery of dental care.
The mechanical bonding of restorations to tooth
structure by etching enamel and dentin and the use of
bonding systems has led to the development of many
new composite restorative materials, as well as conservative restorative bonding techniques. Studies on filler composition and polymerization methodology for composite
materials have resulted in both increased esthetic qualities and resistance to wear. Similarly, the benefits of
sealants are becoming more widely accepted for the prevention of pit-and-fissure caries.

CHAPTER 1

Increased knowledge about the carious process and
the beneficial effects of multiple fluoride application has
resulted in a decrease in caries incidence. Likewise, the
increasing professional emphasis on caries prevention is as
important as the recent technologic and scientific advancements. The recognition that most dental disease is
preventable has resulted in better patient self-care and
more conservative efforts by dentists in treatment.
Increased research on biomaterials has led to the introduction of vastly improved dental materials. Developments in impression materials and gold foil and advancements in knowledge about liners and sealers are
also factors that have resulted in better care and treatment for patients. Advances in metallurgy have resulted
in a variety of improved alloys that are either already
available or are being developed. Corrosion-resistant
amalgam alloys have been developed that will enhance
the oral health of the population by providing longerlasting restorations.
All of the factors just mentioned have played an important
role in the development of operative dentistry. They have resulted in a reduction of the incidence of caries and a more conservative and effective approach toward treatment, with the
ultimate result of improved oral health for all populations.

FACTORS AFFECTING THE FUTURE
DEMAND FOR OPERATIVE
DENTISTRY
Because of the dynamic status of operative dentistry,
many future developments and advancements will undoubtedly occur. These advances in technology, science,
and materials will have a significant effect on the future
practice of and demand for operative dentistry. However, there are other factors that will also affect the future of operative dentistry.
To project the future demand for operative dentistry
treatment, both current and projected dental health in
the United States must be identified. This necessitates a
projection of demographic changes, economic factors,
and dental health and the effect of these on the future
demand for dental services.

DEMOGRAPHICS
Between 1990 and 2050, the U.S. population is projected
to increase by 146 million people (to a total of 394 million) 4 1 and the composition of the American population
at that time will also be different; almost one half (47%)
of the population will consist of minorities, 41 and the
numbers of older adults will be significantly higher.
These population changes will affect the entire professional lives of most of today's dental school graduates.
In October 1999, the world's population reached 6 billion, which represented a 1 billion increase during the
previous 12 years. During the twentieth century, the
world population tripled, and by 2100, the world population is expected to reach 12 billion. While the world

I ntroduction to Operative Dentistry

birth rate in 1999 was 370,000 births each day 52 more
than 50,000 Americans also reached the age of 50 during
that year. 57
The percentage of older adults in the population will increase substantially in the future. This increase will occur
primarily as a result of the aging of the baby-boomer generation (the first of whom turned 50 years old on January
1, 1996) and the increased life expectancy for U.S. residents .z 3 By 2010, those 65 years old and older will represent 20% of the populations that age group only
amounted to 4% of the population in 1900 and 7% in
1940. 54 Those 65 years old and older (senior adults)
make up the fastest growing segment of society, growing twice as fast as the general population. For example,
it is projected that the group of people 85 years old and
older will increase by 400% between 2000 and 2050. 6
Because of increased life expectancy, the baby-boomer
generation will grow older than the previous older adult
segment of the population. Many of the baby boomers
were not exposed to fluoridated water during their formative years and consequently have had extensive
restorative dental care. However, this large segment of
the population, as well as other age cohorts (except current older adults), has developed an appreciation for
dental health and practices reasonable dental self-care.
Since most of these individuals will retain more of their
teeth as they age, they will create a continuing demand for
dental services because they will not only want to keep
their teeth but also will experience a standard of living
that will permit a degree of discretionary income for
health care expenditures.
Because of the aging of the U.S. population, emphasis
will shift from the needs of the young to the concerns
and demands of middle-aged people and older adults.
Although the absolute numbers of children will not decrease substantially in the future, their percentage in the
population and relative importance in health care policies will decrease. On the other hand, older adults will
increase in both absolute number and importance. Already older adults (those 65 years old and older) are receiving a much higher percentage of health care benefits
than is their percentage of society. Such benefits will increase as the political and economic clout of older adults
increases.

ECONOMIC FACTORS
No one can accurately project the economic future.
While the U.S. economy will be part of a more global
economy, the economic projections for the United States
appear bright. The national deficit may not be eliminated, but it will become a lesser and lesser percentage
of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Annual improvement of the GDP and productivity growth are projected
to be at least equal to earlier periods in U.S. history that
are considered "good" economic times. If inflation and
unemployment continue at reasonable levels (in 1998,

CHAPTER 1

I ntroduction to Operative Dentistry

unemployment was only 4.3% and inflation was approximately 2%),16 there will be more discretionary income available, and discretionary income is generally
what is utilized for dental health expenditures.
Thus it appears that the economic forecast for the
United States is good. With more discretionary income
and more health care benefits for the adult segment of
society, the demand for future dental services should
increase.
GENERAL AND DENTAL HEALTH
OF THE U.S. POPULATION

In considering the current and projected dental health of
the U.S. population, a brief assessment of the general
health of the population is necessary.
General Health. The general health of the U.S. population is good. The ability to prevent or cure infectious
disease has led to an increase in life expectancy, and the
ability to control (partially or fully) some chronic diseases is resulting in a larger proportion of older adults
in the population. Life expectancy rates in 1991 were 80
years for men and 84 years for women , 9 compared to
1776 when the Declaration of Independence was signed
and life expectancy was only 35 years . 53
In 1994, Americans spent $949 billion on health care . 45
More recent projections indicate that the projected total
U.S. health care expenditures of $1.1 trillion (13.5% of
the GDP) in 1997 will increase to $2.2 trillion (16.2% of
the GDP) by 2008. 44 However, access to and financial resources for health care are problems for some segments
of society. More than 30 million Americans do not have
health insurance;4 and older adults (those over the age
of 65) are responsible for four fifths of nursing home
costs and one third of all health expenditures and physician fees . 58
Dental Health. Americans generally have good dental health. Most understand the benefits of good dental
health and practice good oral homecare. Except for
some of current older adults, most Americans do not believe that the eventual loss of teeth is inevitable. Consequently, they are willing to invest their resources for
dental health care. In 1994, $42.2 billion were spent on
dental care in the United States 45 this represented 4.4%
of all health care costs for that year. Private patients paid
about half of dental costs from their out-of-pocket
funds. The government paid only $1.8 billion of dental
costs, representing only 4.3% of dental spending for
1994. Thus the public share of dental costs was very low,
while taxpayers paid 44% of the total health care costs
for that year.45 However, it is projected that dental
spending will more than double between 1994 and 2008,
reaching $93.1 billion by 2008. The rate of dental spending growth will be approximately double that of projected economic growth during the same period .44
Over 100 million Americans have dental insurance,
which in 1996 covered approximately 49% of all dental

care costs. 16 Dental insurance grew steadily from 1975 to
1990, then leveled off. However, because of it, dental
care has become less expensive for the typical consumer
of dental services.
Total real dental expenditures increased from $25.8
billion in 1970 to $47.6 billion in 1996 . 3 In the early 1970s,
dental spending grew at about the same rate as other
personal health care spending and faster than the overall economy. In 1978, the growth rate in the dental sector flattened, and since then dental spending has increased more slowly than either personal health
spending or the overall economy. 16
In considering the future demand for operative dentistry, an assessment of the current and projected status
of caries, missing teeth, and periodontal health is briefly
presented here, followed by a projection of the increased numbers of teeth that will be at risk to dental
disease in the future.
Caries. The incidence of caries has decreased. This reduction in caries is a result of increased usage of
sealants and improved homecare efforts, but primarily
it is a result of increased exposure to fluoride. Fluoridation of community water systems began in Grand
Rapids, Michigan, in 1945. However, only 62% of the
U.S. population on public water supplies currently receives fluoridated water;" this represents approximately 145 million people. Fluoridation also protects
360 million people in approximately 60 countries worldwide." The expanded use of dietary fluoride supplements, school-based fluoride mouth-rinse programs,
professional topical fluoride applications, and fluoride
toothpastes also has contributed to this reduction.' For
example, over one fourth of the school districts in the
United States offer schoolchildren the opportunity to
participate in a fluoride mouth-rinse program .5°
Children ages 5 to 17 are experiencing less caries. In
comparing the results of four U.S. surveys 1' (Table 1-1),
it can be noted that the number of caries-free children is
increasing and the average number of decayed, missing,
and filled tooth surfaces (DMFS [for permanent teeth] or
dmfs [for primary teeth]) is decreasing. In the 1971 to
1974 survey, only 26% of the children were caries-free,
but by 1988 to 1991, 54.7% were caries-free. Likewise, in
1971 to 1974, children averaged 7.1 DMFS; this decreased to 2.5 in 1988 to 1991, a 65% reduction.
Comparison of U.S. National Surveys

CHAPTER I

However, over 45% of the total group ages 5 to 17 did
have caries in the latest survey, and the percentage of
caries-free children increased with age within the
group. Fewer adolescents (12 to 17 years) than children
(5 to 11 years) were caries-free (33% to 74%). Thus by
age 17, almost three out of every four adolescents have
experienced caries.
Also, of the 2.5 DMFS for the years 1988 to 1991, almost 80% were filled surfaces, with the remaining 20%
primarily being decayed surfaces. The affected DMFS
surfaces were: (1) occlusal, 1.4; (2) facial or lingual, 0.8;
and (3) mesial and distal, 0.3. 31 This indicates that occlusal surfaces were five times more likely to be involved than proximal surfaces. 12 This also indicates that
sealant usage could be a significant method to further
reduce caries in children. Although the percentage of
children with sealants almost doubled between the 1986
to 1987 and 1988 to 1991 surveys, only one of five children had sealants at the latter period . 12
The decayed, missing, or filled permanent teeth
(DMFT) averaged 1.6 for the 1988 to 1991 survey. Of these
teeth, 21% were decayed, 78% filled, and 1% missing.
When comparing the ds/dfs and DS/DMFS per person,
the primary tooth ratio was twice that of the permanent
tooth ratio, suggesting less treatment of primary teeth. 12
All of these figures and comparisons indicate a continuing
decline in caries in the permanent dentition of children.
Still, caries continues to affect millions of U.S. adolescents and adults. Almost 94% of dentate adults showed
evidence of coronal caries and almost 23% showed root
caries in the 1988 to 1991 survey The total DMFS for all
adults was about 50, while for dentate adults it was
about 40; for the latter group almost 22 of the surfaces
were decayed or filled, with most of those (19) being
filled surfaces . 43 Also for dentate adults, the average
number of root-surface carious lesions was 1, and half of
those lesions were not filled. The prevalence of caries
in adults increased markedly with age 21 (Table 1-2, as it
relates to root caries only), and when all caries is considered, the aggregate caries increment may be higher
in people over 55 years old than in children .26,46
Missing Teeth. During the past several decades,
there has been a steady reduction in both edentulism

From Hicks J, Haitz CM, Garcia-Godoy F: Root-surface caries formation: effect of in vitro APF treatment, J AM er Dent Assoc 129:449-453,
1998.

I ntroduction to Operative Dentistry

and numbers of teeth lost per person. While these
trends indicate that edentulism may be disappearing,
partial edentulism will continue. While in 1988 to 1991,
more than 9 out of 10 adults (18 years and older) were
dentate, only about 30% had all of their teeth .36 Those
adults who had teeth averaged 23.5 teeth . 36 Both edentulism and the number of teeth present are strongly influenced by age. For example, the 1988 to 1991 National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)
III revealed that 100% of the group ages 18 to 24 were
dentate, while 44% of the group 75 years and older were
edentulous. Likewise, the 18- to 24-year-old dentate
group averaged 27.1 teeth, while the 75-years-and-older
group had only 9 teeth. However, the older age groups
still showed the greatest decreases in edentulism and
increases in retained teeth. In a 1971 to 1974 survey,
45.6% of people ages 65 to 74 were edentulous. In the
NHANES 1111988 to 1991 survey only 28.6% of this age
group was edentulous, and half of those were edentulous 20 years before the survey, indicating that only
about 12% of that age group had actually become edentulous in the last 20 years .21
Edentulism will continue to decrease, and more teeth
will be retained. This will result in more teeth being at
risk to dental disease, which may result in both increased need and demand for dental care.
Periodontal Status. The NHANES III survey indicated, that while over 90% of those 13 years old or older
had experienced some minor loss of periodontal attachment, only 25% had attachment loss of 3 to 4 mm, and
only 15% had 5 mm or greater attachment loss." Attachment loss (both number of affected people and severity)
increased with age. Gingival recession also increased
with age. While 86% of the older adults experienced
some recession, only 40% of the overall population had
recession." More severe recession (3 mm or greater) affected half of older adults (Table 1-3). Because of the increasing percentage of recession with age, there is a corresponding increased percentage of root caries.
Oral Cancer. Oral and pharyngeal cancer is the sixth
most common neoplastic diseases An estimated 30,750
new cases of oropharyngeal cancer are expected to be
diagnosed in the United States in 1999, which will be 3%
of all cancers diagnosed .33 The mortality rate associated
with oral cancer has not improved in the last 40 years.
Ultimately, 50% of people who have oral cancer die as a
result of the malignancy, and 8440 deaths were predicted in the United States in 1999. 33
Teeth at Risk to Dental Disease. In 1989, Reinhardt
and others used some survey results in combination
with other studies and Bureau of Census population
projections to determine and predict how many teeth
would be at risk to dental disease. Their findings reported that in 1980 2.8 billion teeth were at risk to dental disease, with expectations of 4 billion in 1990, 4.4 billion by 2000, and 5 billion by 2030. 48 Thus between 1990

CHAPTER 1

I ntroduction to Operative Dentistry

From National Center for Health Statistics: Plan and operation of the
Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey: 1988-1994
(DHHS publication number [PHS] 94-1308, series 1, no. 322), Hyattsville, Md,1994, National Center for Health Statistics.
and 2030 there will be a projected increase of 1 billion
teeth at risk to dental disease. This increase will occur
because of a decreased rate of tooth loss combined with
the aging of the baby boomers. Between 1990 and 2030,
there will also be a projected 73% increase in people
ages 45 and older and a 104% increase in senior adults,
thereby resulting in 90% more teeth in the 45-and-older
age group and 153% more teeth in the senior adult group.'
The future demand for operative dentistry care will increase. As previously noted, the population will increase,
with the greatest increase occurring in the older adult
component of society. Because these increased numbers
of adults will retain more teeth, there will be more teeth
at risk to dental disease, and many of these teeth will require operative care. In further exploring these expectations, several other factors must be addressed.
DENTAL MANPOWER
In 1996, there were 166,425 professionally active dentists
in the United States.' Ten years earlier, there were approximately 125,000 dentists.'-' Between 1994 and 2020
the number of professionally active dentists is expected
to increase by almost 13%,' which will be less than the
expected population increase. The number of dentists
per 1000 people is expected to decrease slightly between
1999 and 2020 .14 In 1990 there were 0.58 dentists per 1000
people. However, to keep that ratio, there would need
to be a 58% increase in the number of dentists by 2050;
because of the increasing minority percentage of the
it is thought that the greatest increase
population,
should be in the number of minority dentists. 41 This increased number of minority dentists is not likely to occur, even though between 1986 and 1996 the proportion
of female dental students increased from 27% to 37%
and the proportion of white male dental students decreased from 84% to 70%. 14
While the number of first-year dental school students
decreased by 28% between 1976 (5936) and 1996
(4255),'4 it is expected to increase by 36% between 1996
and 2020 (5775). 14 Likewise, the number of dental
school graduates decreased by 29% between 1976 (5336)
and 1996 (3810) but is expected to increase by 42% from

1996 to 2020 (5414). Since 1986, six U.S. dental schools
have closed and one new one has opened. 14
Of active private dental practitioners 82% are general
dentists, and 92% own their dental practice.' The number of hours worked per week decreased from 42.3 in
1986 to 37.1 in 1995,' 5 yet the hours per week spent treating patients increased during the same period-from
77% to 90%-and more of this increased treatment time
was devoted to diagnostic and preventive services."
Even though the enrollment in dental schools is proj ected to increase, the projected increase in dentists for
the next several decades will not be large. Therefore
there will be fewer dentists treating more people who
will have retained more teeth. This represents an effective increase in the demand for dental care.
PROJECTED NEED FOR OPERATIVE DENTISTRY
The increased number of hours needed for operative care in
the future will be for the following operative procedures:
(1) restorations for teeth with new carious lesions; (2)
restorations for teeth with root caries; (3) restorations to
replace existing, faulty restorations; and (4) restorations
to enhance the esthetic appearance of patients.
New Caries. New caries will continue to occur. Even
though almost 55% of children (ages 5 to 17) are cariesfree, the remaining 45% have caries. By age 17, three out
of four adolescents have experienced caries. Adults, especially older adults, have high caries rates. As previously
mentioned, when all caries is considered, the aggregate
caries increment may be higher in people over 55 years
old than in children." ." Less than 6% of people ages 18
to 64 have no caries. 17
Root Caries. Root caries will increase due to the increased number of older adults who will retain more
teeth and experience more gingival recession. Additionally, many older adults may have systemic problems
that may directly or indirectly alter normal salivary
functioning, thus increasing the potential for root caries
formation. While only one fourth of all dentate adults
have evidence of root caries, the prevalence increases
markedly with age" (see Table 1-2).
Replacement Restorations. Replacement restorations will also stimulate much future demand. There is
a large need for replacement dentistry. It has been estimated that 75% of all operative treatment is due to replacement of existing restorations . 32 Furthermore, 70%
of all restorations per year are replacements of existing
restorations. The knowledge that baby boomers are
reaching their older adult years, where high numbers of
decayed and filled tooth surfaces often occur, documents the continuing need for future restorative care.
More than 50% of the income from restorative procedures is from the replacement of restorations in patients
older than 40.38
Esthetic Restorations. The public has come to appreciate the possibilities of esthetic enhancements from

CHAPTER 1

dental treatment due to publicity about bonding, publicity in the form of magazine articles, television shows,
and special news programs. In 1990, it was estimated
that 10% of a dentist's gross income was derived from
esthetic treatment on noncarious teeth .47 More recently
it has been reported that one of every five intracoronal
restorations done in the United States are tooth-colored.
This same report states, "It is likely that the more esthetically pleasing materials eventually will be the predominant intracoronal and extracoronal restorative concepts. "'18 With more teeth being retained, more people
are likely to seek appearance enhancements, especially
when most such treatments are relatively simple, noninvasive, and nonstressful.
PUBLIC'S PERCEPTION OF DENTISTRY
The public's perception of dentistry is another factor
that will influence whether the increased numbers of
teeth and increased need for operative services will be
converted to increased demand. Fortunately, the public
considers dentists and dentistry very positively. The
public ranks a dentist as one of the most respected
members of the community, and dentistry has the highest satisfaction rating when the public assesses the services they receive. Lastly, the public not only thinks
highly of the dental profession, they also appreciate the
benefits of good dental health. All of this suggests a continuing demand for operative services.
PATIENT VISITS
Because of the projected significant increase in the number of senior adults, it is important to consider their past
use of dental services as well as their potential economic
status. In 1970, 25.8% of senior adults visited a dentist
annually; this percentage increased to 38.6% by 1983. 24
While before 1983 this group averaged only 1.5 visits to
the dentist per year,' they increased their dental visits
by 29% between 1983 and 1986. 318 Several years later
they were reported to make more visits to a dentist than
any other age group.
The economic status of adults will affect their future
dental demand. With dental expenditures considered
discretionary, the availability of discretionary income
will influence the amount of dental care sought. One
study showed that over one half of older adults with annual incomes below $10,000 had not seen a dentist for 5
years, while only 18% of those with incomes over
$35,000 had not seen a dentist during the same time period. 38 Overall, older adults (over age 65) currently have
77% of the financial assets in the United States, 68% of
all money market funds, and 80% of all money in savings and loans institutions. Additionally, 75% own their
own home, with 84% of the mortgages already paid
off.-3 Therefore, new older adults and future older adults will
not only possess positive perceptions about dentistry and den-

I ntroduction to Operative Dentistry

tal health but also will have the economic means to secure the
dental care they need.
For all people in the United States, less than 10% reported having unmet dental care wants .4° This report
further indicated that these individuals were more likely
to: (1) be in the poorest health, (2) have chronic conditions, (3) be a head of household with minimal education, (4) have less family income, or (5) have no dental insurance. However, almost half of this group indicated
that they had not tried to obtain dental care, even though
almost half also indicated that their dental problems limited their activities. The predominant barrier to receipt of
wanted dental care was a financial consideration.
These factors affecting the demand for operative dentistry project an increase in operative treatment in the future. The increased number of older adults, the increased number of teeth, the increased affluence of the
population, the positive image of dentistry, and the projected increased hours of operative need all support this
increased demand.
FUTURE OF OPERATIVE
DENTISTRY
Many significant advancements in health care occurred
in the twentieth century; included in these advancements are genetic alterations, genetic engineering, public education, vaccines, fluoridation, x-rays, computed
tomography (CT) scans, magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), antibiotics, ultrasound procedures, and sanitation. During this century, life span doubled and the
quality of life was greatly improved. Many of these factors had an effect on improving dental care.
"Research is the primary catalyst to professional
growth and has greatly added to the understanding of
the etiology, diagnosis, and treatment of dental diseases."' Exciting research is occurring that will have an
additional effect on the future of operative dentistry, and
knowledge about new developments and technologies
will also affect the practice. These developments might
be in the areas of molecular and cellular biology, genetics, pharmacology, radiation biology, radiation physics
and technology, tomography, digital radiography, quantitative light-induced fluorescence, electrical conductivity, ultrasonography, dental materials based on polymer
chemistry and ion exchange, microbiology, immunology,
and behavioral science. "In terms of future scientific
achievement, it is not difficult to predict startling new
advances due to the application of recombinant DNA
technology, the application of space age technology, and
the general advancement of scientific methodology. Advances in these areas can have direct impact on dental
practice through the development of new treatments
and preventive modes, new biomaterials applicable to
dental practice, and more sophisticated techniques to
measure the health status of individuals."' 9

CHAPTER 1

I ntroduction to Operative Dentistry

Research in operative dentistry is now occurring in a
number of fields. The use of lasers in dentistry may lead
to a new mechanism for welding dental alloys or altering tooth structure in tooth preparation. Already, lasers
are used in etching enamel and making enamel more resistant to demineralization. Extended uses of bonding
techniques and further developments in composite and
adhesive restorative materials will lead to even more
conservative restorative techniques. The beneficial use
of composites in posterior teeth has become evident.
Much research and clinical testing also is being done on
castable or pressed ceramic materials. The introduction
of computer-generated restorations has stimulated
much interest, and further refinement of such technology is occurring. Improvements in composites, adhesive systems, castable ceramics, and computer-generated restorations
could result in a significant decrease in the use of metal alloy
systems in operative dentistry. Also, increasing concern

about the potential toxicity of some components of current alloy systems, such as mercury and nickel, may result in decreased use of these systems in the future. Significant environmental concerns are surfacing regarding
the disposal of certain materials used in dentistry, especially mercury.
Efforts are also being made to develop an anticaries
vaccine. However, even if developed, the widespread
use of such an agent may not occur in the foreseeable future in the United States because of the already documented caries reduction from multiple fluoride use, limitations imposed by regulatory agencies, and concern
about possible side effects . Whereas the use of such an
agent in developing countries may provide greater immediate benefits, its use in the United States may be
confined to high-risk patients.
Methods for adhesively bonding composite materials
to dentin have improved. These developments have had
dramatic effects on the practice of operative dentistry,
resulting in minimal tooth preparation. "The capacity to
develop relatively predictable and enduring adhesion
between restorative materials and tooth structure has
had the greatest impact on restorative dentistry in recent decades. 30 Effective dentin bonding significantly increases tooth conservation31 while potentially reducing
patient anxiety. Techniques used for such bonding procedures may also increase productivity.
Finally, the developing concepts in cariology may have
major implications in dealing with dental caries. The increased knowledge about factors involved in the carious
process has placed a greater emphasis on treating the
carious lesion by means other than restorative techniques. It seems possible to foresee a time when diagnosis and treatment techniques are so refined as to preclude the necessity of tooth preparation to control some
carious activity. The remineralization of a tooth surface
affected by a beginning carious lesion will not only de-

crease the need for restorative care but also result in a
tooth surface that will be more resistant to subsequent
carious attacks. The development of appropriate fluoride and antimicrobial applications and techniques to
produce this remineralization is now a reality. All of
these developments and changes will occur in a future
environment of increased need for operative treatment
because of more people, especially adults, who will retain more of their teeth. The emphasis of the profession will
shift to care for the senior adult segment of the population.

This population will require significant dental care due
not only to replacement needs for existing restorations
but also to development of new caries, especially root
caries. Increased understanding of treatment methods
for older adults will be required, as will improved
knowledge pertaining to their overall medical health.
Dental research efforts will continue seeking treatment
methods that will be more efficient and less stressful for
these patients, and bonded restorations, both amalgam
and composite, will provide benefits in treating this segment of the population.

SUMMARY
Many factors have been presented in this chapter, some
of which will be expanded in other chapters of this
book. The objective has been to identify the factors that influence operative dentistry both today and in the future. Certainly changes in today's society, changes in the future
oral health of the U.S. population, and developments
within the discipline of operative dentistry will affect
future practice.
Many exciting advances have already been made, and
others are expected. Important progress is being made
toward the time when caries and periodontal disease
will no longer be major public health problems. "As
part of their professional responsibilities, dentists have
an obligation to monitor the dental welfare of the public and adjust their patterns of treatment accordingly.
Professional ethics dictate that dentists must embrace
new and accepted dental treatment, materials and devices, and, at the same time, discard outmoded treatment and techniques in pursuit of optimal oral health
for the public."'
Dental education should strive to produce practitioners who can think critically using the scientific method
so they can be in a position to evaluate future claims related to advancing the profession. Dentistry must also
continue to broaden its knowledge of the biologic basis
on which it is founded. Practitioners must continually
familiarize themselves with the advances being made.
Increased research activity and continued practitioner
adaptability will result in improved oral health of populations throughout the world.
The future of operative dentistry is good! This chapter has presented some of the reasons. The remainder of

CHAPTER 1

this book will present much information as it pertains to
the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of clinical operative procedures. There is emphasis on both treatment
of older adults and nonsurgical treatments for caries.
The use of amalgam restorations, while still promoted,
is presented in more limited clinical applications. The
promotion of bonding procedures is enhanced throughout the book.

REFERENCES
1. American Dental Association, Bureau of Economic Research
and Statistics: Utilization of dental services by the elderly population, Chicago, 1980.
2. American Dental Association: Interim report of the American
Dental Association's special committee on the future of dentistry: issue papers on dental research, manpower, education,
practice and public and professional concerns (special report),
J Am Dent Assoc, Sept 1982.
3. American Dental Association, Survey Center: Consumer price
index for dental services, 1960-1996. Chicago, 1997, American
Dental Association.
4. American Dental Association, Survey Center: 1994 Survey of
Dental Practice. Chicago: American Dental Association, 1995.
5. American Dental Association, Survey Center: 1982 Survey of
Dental Practice, Chicago, 1983, American Dental Association.
6. Berkey DB et al: The old-old dental patient: the challenge of
clinical decision-making, J Amer Dent Assoc 127:321-332,
1996.
7. Berry J: The demographics of dentistry, J Amer Dent Assoc
127:1327-1330, 1996.
8. Black CE, Black BM: From pioneer to scientist, St. Paul, Minn,
1940, Brace.
9. Brwen WH: Dental caries: is it an extinct disease?, J Am Dent
Assoc 122:49-52, Sept 1991.
10. British Fluoridation Society: Optimal water fluoridation: status
worldwide, Liverpool, 1998, British Fluoridation Society.
11. Brown LJ, Brunelle JA, Kingman A: Periodontal status in the
United States: 1988-1991. Prevalence, extent, and demographic variation, J Dent Res 75(Spec Iss):672-683, 1996.
12. Brown LJ et al: Dental caries and sealant usage in U.S. children: 1988-1991, J Amer Dent Assoc 127:335-343, 1996.
13. Brown LJ, Lazar V: Demand-side trends, J Amer Dent Assoc
129:1685-1691, 1998
14. Brown LJ, Lazar V: Dentist work force and educational
pipeline, J Amer Dent Assoc 129:1700-1707, 1998.
15. Brown LJ Lazar V: Dentists and their practices, J Amer Dent
Assoc 129:1692-1699, 1998.
16. Brown LJ, Lazar V: The economic state of dentistry: an
overview, J Amer Dent Assoc 129:1683-1691, 1998.
17. Brown LJ, Winn DM, White BA: Dental caries, restoration and
tooth conditions in U.S. adults, 1988-1991, J Amer Dent Assoc
127:1315-1325,1996.
18. Christensen GT: Intracoronal and extracoronal tooth restorations 1999, J Amer Dent Assoc 130:557-560, 1999.
19. DePaola DP: Application of basic and medical sciences in the
dental curriculum, J Dent Educ 45:685, 1981.
20. Douglass CW, Furino A: Balancing dental service requirements and supplies: epidemiologic and demographic evidence, J Am Dent Assoc 121:587-592, Nov 1990.
21. Eklund SA, Burt BA: Risk factors for total tooth loss in the
United States: longitudinal analysis of national data, J Public
Health Dent 54:5-14,1994.

I ntroduction to Operative Dentistry

22. Flexner A: Medical education in the United States and Canada, a
report to the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching NewYork, 1910, Carnegie Foundation.
23. Friend T, DeBarros A: Science finds no limit on life span (Special report), USA Today 5D-7D March 17, 1999.
24. Giangrego E: Dentistry and the older adult, J Am Dent Assoc
114:299-307, March 1987.
25. Gies WJ: Dental education in the United States and Canada, a report to the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching,
NewYork, 1926, Carnegie Foundation.
26. Glass RL, Alman JE, Chauncey HH: A 10-year longitudinal
study of caries incidence rates in a sample of male adults in
the USA, Caries Res 21:360-367, 1987.
27. Heymann HO, Roberson TM: Operative dentistry in North
Carolina: a survey, NC Dent Gazette 3(6):10, 1981.
28. Hicks J, Flaitz CM, Garcia-Godoy F: Root-surface caries
formation: effect of in vitro APF treatment, J Amer Dent Assoc
129:449-453, 1998.
29. Horner HH: Dental education today, Chicago, 1947, University
of Chicago Press.
30. Hume WR: Restorative Dentistry: current status and future
directions, J Dent Ed 62(10):781-790, 1998.
31. Kaste LM et al: Coronal caries in the primary and permanent
dentition of children and adolescents 1-17 years of age:
United States, 1988-1991, J Dent Res 75(Spec Iss):631-641,
1996.
32. Kidd EA, Toffenetti F, Major IA: Secondary caries, Int Dent J
42:127-138,1992.
33. Landis SH et al: Cancer statistics, CA Cancer j Clin 49:8-31,
1999.
34. Levit KR, Freeland MS: National medical care spending,
Health Aff 7:124-136, 1988.
35. Loe H: The impact of research and technological advances on
dental education, J Dent Educ 45:670, 1981.
36. Marcus SE et al: Tooth retention and tooth loss in the permanent dentition of adults: United States, 1988-1991, J Dent Res
75(Spec Iss):684-695, 1996.
37. McCluggage RW: A history of the American Dental Association,
Chicago, 1959, American Dental Association.
38. Meskin LH et al: Economic impact of dental service utilization by older adults, J Am Dent Assoc 120:665-668, June
1990.
39. Mount GJ, Hume WR: Preservation and restoration of tooth
structure, London, 1998, Mosby.
40. Mueller CD, Schur CL, Paramore LC: Access to dental care in
the United States, JAmer Dent Assoc 129:429-437, 1998.
41. Murdock SH, Hoque MN: Current patterns and future trends
in the population of the United States: implications for dentistry and the dental profession in the twenty-first century,
J Am Coll Dentists 29-35, Winter 1998.
42. Nash KD, Bentley JE: Is restorative dentistry on its way out?
J Amer Dent Assoc 122(9):79-80, 1991.
43. National Center for Health Statistics: Plan and operation of the
Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey: 19881994 (DHHS publication number [PHS] 94-1308, series 1, no.
322), Hyattsville, Md, 1994, National Center for Health
Statistics.
44. Palmer C: Dental spending to hit $57 billion, ADA News
30(14):1-11,1999.
45. Palmer C: Dental spending tops $42 billion, ADA News
27(12):16,1996.
46. Papas A, Joshi A, Giunta J: Prevalence and intraoral distribution of coronal and root caries in middle-aged and older
adults, Caries Res 26:459-465, 1992.

CHAPTER

I ntroduction to Operative Dentistry

47. Reinhardt JW, Capilouto ML: Composite resin esthetic dentistry survey in New England, J Am Dent Assoc 120:541-544,
May 1990.
48. Reinhardt JW, Douglass CW: The need for operative dentistry
services: projecting the effects of changing disease patterns,
Oper Dent 14:114-120, 1989.
49. Resine S, Litt M: Social and psychological theories and their
use for dental practice, Int Dent J 43:279-287, 1993.
50. Silversin JB, Coombs JA, Drolette ME: Achievements of the
seventies: self-applied fluorides, J Public Health Dent 40:256,
1980.
51. Slavkin HC: And we all lived happily ever after: understanding the biological controls of aging, J Amer Dent Assoc
129:629-633, 1998.
52. The Sun News: Informatio n from the United Nations Population
Division, Myrtle Beach, Oct 10, 1999.
53. Truono EJ: The aging population and its impact on the future
of dentistry-a symposium, JAm Coll Dent 58(2):14-16, Summer 1991.

54. U.S. Bureau of the Census: Decennial census and current
population, Report Series 11 25, 1987.
55. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Use of dental services and dental health, United States, 1986 (DHHS publication no. 88-1593), Washington, DC, 1988, U.S. Government Printing Office.
56. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Oral Health: Fluoridation fact sheet (No. FL-141), Atlanta, December 1993,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
57. Vatter RH: Boomers enter the golden fifties, Stat Bull Metrop
Insur Co 79(l):2-9,1998.
58. Waldo DR, Levit KR, Lazenby H: National health expenditures: 1985, Health Care Financing Rev 8:1-43, 1986.
59. Winn DM et al: Scientific progress in understanding oral and
pharyngeal cancers, J Amer Dent Assoc 129:713-718, 1998.

I.

II.

3. Interarch tooth relationships, 40
4. Posterior cusp characteristics, 42
5. Supporting cusps, 42
6. Nonsupporting cusps, 42
B. Mechanics of mandibular motion, 45
1. Mandible and temporomandibular joints, 45
2. Mandibular movement, 45
3. Types of motion, 45
C. Capacity of motion of the mandible, 48
1. Li mits of mandibular motion:
the borders, 48
2. Sagittal view, 51
3. Horizontal view, 54
4. Frontal view, 54
D. Articulators and mandibular movements, 55
E. Tooth contacts during mandibular
movements, 58
1. Anterior tooth contacts, 58
2. Posterior tooth contacts, 61
F. Neurologic correlates and control of
mastication, 61

Teeth and investing tissues, 15
A. Dentitions, 15
B. Classes of human teeth: form and function, 15
1. Incisors, 15
2. Canines, 15
3. Premolars, 16
4. Molars, 16
C. Structures of the teeth, 16
1. Enamel, 16
2. Pulp-dentin complex, 22
3. Cementum, 31
D. Physiology of tooth form, 32
1. Function, 32
2. Contours, 32
3. Proximal contact area, 33
4. Embrasures, 33
E. Maxilla and mandible, 35
F. Oral mucosa, 35
G. Periodontium, 36
1. Gingival unit, 37
2. Attachment apparatus, 37
Occlusion, 37
A. General description, 38
1. Tooth alignment and dental arches, 38
2. Anterior-posterior interarch
relationships, 40

14

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

Dental anatomy, histology, physiology, and occlusion
are interrelated disciplines that are prerequisites for success in restorative procedures. In addition to knowledge
of the instruments and materials used to prepare and restore teeth, the relationships of internal and external
tooth anatomy to function and restorative procedures
must be understood. A knowledge of the various structures of the teeth (enamel, dentin, cementum, and pulp)
and their relationships to each other, as well as of the
supporting structures, is necessary for excellence in the
performance of operative dental procedures. (See Fig.
2-3 for an illustration of these structures.)
A basic understanding of proper anatomic form is
essential in the restoration of either a single tooth or a
group of teeth, because function depends on form. The
individual form of a tooth and the contour relationships with
adjacent and opposing teeth are major determinants offunction in mastication, esthetics, speech, and protection. The

protective function of tooth form applies to both the
contiguous investing tissues (osseous and mucosal)
and the pulp. Proper tooth form usually is a factor contributing to a healthy state of the investing tissues,
with a critical balance of protection (e.g., of interproximal tissues) and stimulative massage from the passage
of food during mastication (see Figs. 2-37, 2-38, and
2-39). Certainly the soft pulp is protected by the hard,
overlying tooth structures of dentin, enamel, and cementum. Also, knowing the usual form of the pulp cavity (the pulp chamber and the pulp canal[s]), is an essential factor for determining the materials and
procedures best suited to restoring the protective function of the tooth's hard tissues lost due to disease or
trauma. This knowledge is helpful in maintaining the
health of the pulp.
The tooth is an organ of mastication and must be
treated as such in restoring it to proper form and function and preventing further insult to it and its investing tissues. A high degree of manipulative skill is required in the fabrication of a restoration to replace lost
tooth structure and prevent further damage to the
tooth and supporting structures. The supporting tissue

CLASSES OF HUMAN TEETH: FORM
AND FUNCTION
Human teeth are divided into classes on the basis of
form and function. Both the primary and permanent
dentitions include incisor, canine, and molar classes.
The fourth class, the premolar, is found only in the permanent dentition (Fig. 2-1). Tooth form predicts the
function of teeth; therefore class traits are the characteristics that place teeth into functional categories. Since
the diet of humans consists of both animal and vegetable foods, the human dentition is called omnivorous.
I ncisors. The incisors are located near the entrance of
the oral cavity and function as cutting or shearing instruments for food (see Fig. 2-1). From a proximal view,
the crowns of these teeth have a triangular shape with a
narrow incisal surface, including the incisal edge, and a
broad cervical base (see Fig. 2-47, D.) The incisors contribute significantly in cutting actions and other functions; esthetics; and phonetics.
Canines. The canines possess the longest roots of all
teeth and are located at the corners of the dental arch.
They function in the seizing, piercing, and tearing of
food, as well as in cutting. From a proximal view the
crown also has a triangular shape with a thick incisal
ridge. The stocky anatomic form of the crown and
length of the root are reasons why these teeth are strong,
stable abutment teeth for a fixed or removable prosthe-

mechanism of the teeth is an important consideration in operative procedures because the attachment apparatus

must be treated with care and respect to prevent periodontal disease.
TEETH AND INVESTING TISSUES
DENTITIONS
Normally, in the human dentition, two sets of teeth
erupt during the cycle from childhood to adult. The
first set is the primary dentition, which usually consists
of 10 maxillary and 10 mandibular teeth. The second
set usually is referred to as the permanent dentition and
normally consists of 16 maxillary and 16 mandibular
teeth.

FIG. 2-1

Maxillary and mandibular teeth in maximum intercuspal position. The classes of teeth are incisors (i), canines (c), premolars (p), and molars (m). Note that cusps of
mandibular teeth are one-half cusp anterior of corresponding
cusps of teeth in maxillary arch.

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

sis. The canines serve as important guides in occlusion
because of their anchorage and position in the dental
arches (see Figs. 2-1 and 2-60).
Premolars. The premolars serve a dual role in function; they act like the canines in the tearing of food and
are similar to molars in the grinding of food. Whereas

the first premolars are angular, with their facial cusps
resembling the canines, the lingual cusps of the maxillary premolars and molars have a more rounded
anatomic form (see Figs. 2-1 and 2-40). The occlusal surfaces present a series of curves in the form of concavities
and convexities that should be maintained throughout
life for correct occlusal contacts and function.
Molars. The molars are large, multicusped, strongly
anchored teeth located nearest the temporomandibular
joint (TMJ), which serves as the fulcrum during function
(see Fig. 2-54). These teeth have a major role in the
crushing, grinding, and chewing of food to the smallest
dimensions suitable for deglutition. The occlusal surfaces of both premolars and molars act as a myriad of
shears that function in the final mastication of food. The
premolars and molars are also important in maintaining
the vertical dimension of the face (see Figs. 2-1 and 2-2).

STRUCTURES OF THE TEETH

FIG. 2-2

Occlusal surfaces of maxillary and mandibular first
and second molars after several years of use, showing
rounded curved surfaces and minimal wear.

FIG . 2-3

Schematic drawing illustrating
cross-section of maxillary molar and
i ts supporting structures. 1, enamel;
1a, gnarled enamel; 2, dentin; 3a, pulp
chamber; 3b, pulp horn; 3c, pulp canal;
4, apical foramen; 5, cementum; 6, periodontal fibers in periodontal ligament;
7, alveolar bone; 8, maxillary sinus;
9, mucosa; 10, submucosa; 11, blood vessels; 12, gingiva; 13, l i nes of Retzius.
(From Brauer JC, Richardson RE: The
dental assistant, ed 3, New York, 1964,
McGraw-Hill.)

The teeth are composed of enamel, pulp-dentin complex, and cementum (Fig. 2-3). Each of these structures
is discussed individually.
Enamel. Enamel is formed by cells called ameloblasts,
which originate from the embryonic germ layer known

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

as ectoderm. Ameloblasts have short extensions toward
the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ); these are termed
Tomes processes. Enamel covers the anatomic crown of
the tooth and varies in thickness in different areas (see
Fig. 2-14). The enamel is thicker at the incisal and occlusal areas of a tooth and becomes progressively thinner until it terminates at the cementoenamel junction.
The thickness also varies from one class of tooth to another, averaging 2 mm at the incisal ridges of incisors
and varying from 2.3 to 2.5 mm at the cusps of premolars and 2.5 to 3 mm at the cusps of molars. Enamel
usually decreases in thickness toward the junction of
the developmental cuspal lobes of the posterior teeth
(premolars and molars), sometimes nearing zero where
the junction is fissured (noncoalesced) (see Figs. 2-12
and 2-14.)
Because enamel is mostly gray and semitranslucent,
the color of a tooth depends upon the color of the underlying dentin, thickness of the enamel, and amount of
stain in the enamel. The amount of translucency of
enamel is related to variations in the degree of calcification and homogeneity. Abnormal conditions of enamel
usually result in aberrant color. Enamel becomes temporarily whiter within minutes when a tooth is isolated
from the moist oral environment by a rubber dam or absorbents. Thus the shade must be determined before
isolation and preparation of a tooth for a tooth-colored
restoration. This change in color is explained by the
temporary loss of loosely bound (or exchangeable) water (less than 1% by weight).
Chemically, enamel is a highly mineralized crystalline
structure containing from 95% to 98% inorganic matter
by weight. Hydroxyapatite, in the form of a crystalline
lattice, is the largest mineral constituent and is present
90% to 92% by volume. Other minerals and trace elements are contained in smaller amounts. The remaining
constituents of tooth enamel are an organic content of
about 1% to 2% and a water content of about 4% by
weight; these total approximately 6% by volume.
Structurally, enamel is composed of millions of
enamel rods or prisms, which are the largest structural

components, as well as rod sheaths and a cementing
inter-rod substance in some areas. Inter-rod substance,
or sheath, may be the increased spacing between crystallites oriented differently to where the "tail" portion of
one rod meets the "head" portion of another. This spacing apparently is partially organic material. The rods
vary in number from approximately 5 million for a
mandibular incisor to about 12 million for a maxillary
molar. The rods are densely packed and intertwined in
a wavy course, and each extends from the DEJ to the external surface of the tooth. In general the rods are
aligned perpendicularly to both the DEJ and the tooth
surface in the primary and permanent dentitions, except
in the cervical region of permanent teeth where they are
oriented outward in a slightly apical direction. In the
primary dentition the enamel rods in the cervical and
central parts of the crown are nearly perpendicular to
the long axis of the tooth and are similar in their direction to the permanent teeth in the occlusal two thirds of
the crown. Enamel rod diameter near the dentinal borders is about 4 /-tm (about 8 M,m near the surface); this
difference accommodates the larger outer surface of the
enamel crown compared to the dentinal surface at
the DEJ.
The hardest substance of the human body is enamel. Hardness may vary over the external tooth surface according
to the location; also, it decreases inward, with hardness
lowest at the DEJ. The density of enamel also decreases
from the surface to the DEJ. Enamel is a very brittle
structure with a high elastic modulus and low tensile
strength, which indicates a rigid structure. However,
dentin is a highly compressive tissue that acts as a cushion for the enamel. Enamel requires a base of dentin to
withstand masticatory forces. Enamel rods that fail to
possess a dentin base because of caries or improper
preparation design are easily fractured away from
neighboring rods. For maximal strength in tooth preparation, all enamel rods should be supported by dentin
(Fig. 2-4).
Human enamel is composed of rods that in transverse
section are shaped with a rounded head or body section
FIG

2-4 A, Enamel rods unsupported
by dentin base are fractured away
readily by pressure from hand instrument. B, Cervical preparation showing
enamel rods supported by dentin base.

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

Electron micrograph (approximately x5000) of crosssection of rods in mature human enamel. Crystal orientation is
different in "bodies" (B) than in "tails" (T). (From AH Meckel,
WJ Griebstein, RJ Neal. Structure of mature human dental
enamels observed by electron microscopy, Arch Oral Biol, vol
10, 1965, Pergamon.)

F I G . 2-5

and a tail section, which forms a repetitive series of interlocking prisms. The rounded head portion of each
prism (5 pm wide) lies between the narrow tail portions
(5 pm long) of two adjacent prisms (Fig. 2-5). Generally,
the rounded head portion is oriented in the incisal or occlusal direction; the tail section is oriented cervically.
The structural components of the enamel prism are
millions of small, elongated apatite crystallites that are
variable in size and shape. The crystallites are tightly
packed in a distinct pattern of orientation that gives
strength and structural identity to the enamel prisms.
The long axis of the apatite crystallites within the central
region of the head (body) is aligned almost parallel to
the rod long axis, and the crystallites incline with increasing angles (up to 65 degrees) to the prism axis in
the tail region. The susceptibility of these crystallites to
acid, either from an etching procedure or caries, appears
to be correlated with their orientation. Whereas the dissolution process occurs more in the head regions of the

FIG 2-6
.
Electron micrograph (approximately x350,000) of
mature, hexagon-shaped enamel crystallites (arrows). (From
Nylen MU, Eanes ED, Omnell KA: J Cell Biol, vol 18, 1963,
Rockefeller University Press.)
rod, the tail regions and the periphery of the head regions are relatively resistant to acid attack. The crystallites are irregular in shape, with an average length of
1600 A and an average width of 200 to 400 A. Each apatite crystallite is composed of thousands of unit cells
that have a highly ordered arrangement of atoms. A
crystallite may be 300 unit cells long, 40 cells wide, and
20 cells thick in a hexagonal configuration (Fig. 2-6).
An organic matrix or prism sheath also surrounds individual crystals. This appears to be an organically rich
interspace rather than a structural entity.
Enamel rods follow a wavy, spiraling course, producing an alternating arrangement for each group or layer
of rods as they change direction in progressing from the
dentin toward the enamel surface where they end a few
micrometers short of the tooth surface. Enamel rods
rarely run a straight radial course because it appears
there is an alternating clockwise and counterclockwise
deviation of the rods from the radial course at all levels of
the crown. They initially follow a curving path through
one third of the enamel next to the DEJ. After that, the

CHAPTER2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

FIG . 2-7 Gnarled enamel. (From Schour l: H.J. Noyes' oral histology and embryology, Philadelphia, 1960, Lea & Febiger.)

rods usually follow a more direct path through the remaining two thirds of the enamel to the enamel surface.
There are groups of enamel rods that may entwine with
adjacent groups of rods, and they follow a curving irregular path toward the tooth surface. These comprise
gnarled enamel, which occurs near the cervical regions and
the incisal and occlusal areas (Fig. 2-7). Gnarled enamel is
not subject to cleavage as is regular enamel. This type of
enamel formation does not yield readily to the pressure
of bladed, hand cutting instruments in tooth preparation.
The changes in direction of enamel prisms that minimize cleavage in the axial direction produce an optical
appearance called Hunter-Schreger bands (Fig. 2-S).
These bands appear to be composed of alternate light
and dark zones of varying widths that have slightly different permeability and organic content. These bands
are found in different areas of each class of teeth. Since
the enamel rod orientation varies in each tooth, HunterSchreger bands also have a variation in the number present in each tooth. In the anterior teeth they are located
near the incisal surfaces. They increase in numbers and
areas of the teeth from the canines to the premolars. In
the molars the bands occur from near the cervical region
to the cusp tips. The orientation of the enamel rod heads
and tails and the gnarling of enamel rods provide
strength by resisting, distributing, and dissipating impact forces.

FIG
2-8 Vertical ground section through enamel photographed by reflected light of Hunter-Schreger bands. (From
Yaeger JA: Enamel. In Bhaskar SN, editor: Orban's oral histology and embryology, ed 9, St Louis, 1980, Mosby.)

Enamel tufts are hypomineralized structures of
enamel rods and inter-rod substance that project between adjacent groups of enamel rods from the DEJ
(Fig. 2-9). These projections arise in the dentin, extend
into the enamel in the direction of the long axis of the
crown, and may play a role in the spread of dental
caries. Enamel lamellae are thin, leaflike faults between
enamel rod groups that extend from the enamel surface
toward the DEJ, sometimes extending into the dentin
(see Fig. 2-9). They contain mostly organic material,
which is a weak area predisposing a tooth to the entry
of bacteria and dental caries. Odontoblastic processes
sometimes cross the DEJ into the enamel; these are
termed enamel spindles when their ends are thickened
(Fig. 2-10). They may serve as pain receptors, thereby
explaining the enamel sensitivity experienced by some
patients during tooth preparation.
Enamel rods are formed linearly by successive apposition of enamel in discrete increments. The resulting
variations in structure and mineralization are called the
incremental striae of Retzius and can be considered
growth rings (see Fig. 2-3). In horizontal sections of a
tooth, the striae of Retzius appear as concentric circles.
In vertical sections, the lines transverse the cuspal and
incisal areas in a symmetric arc pattern descending

CHAPTER

FIG.

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

2-9 Horizontal ground section through lamella that
goes from enamel surface into dentin. Note enamel tufts.
(From Yaeger JA: Enamel. In Bhaskar SN, editor: Orban's
oral histology and embryology, ed 9, St Louis, 1980,
Mosby.)

obliquely to the cervical region and terminating at the
DEJ. When these circles are incomplete at the enamel
surface, a series of alternating grooves, called the i mbrication lines of Pickerill, are formed. The elevations between the grooves are called perikymata; these are continuous around a tooth and usually lie parallel to the
cementoenamel junction and each other.
There is a structureless outer layer of enamel about 30
f.m thick found most commonly toward the cervical
area and less often on cusp tips. There are no prism outlines visible, and all the apatite crystals are parallel to
one another and perpendicular to the striae of Retzius.
It appears that this layer is more heavily mineralized.
Microscopically, the enamel surface initially has circular
depressions indicating where the enamel rods end.
These concavities vary in depth and shape, and they
may contribute to the adherence of plaque material,
with a resultant caries attack, especially in young people. However, the dimpled surface anatomy of the
enamel gradually wears smooth with age.
The interface of the enamel and dentin is called the
dentinoenamel junction (Fig. 2-11). It is scalloped or wavy
in outline, with the crest of the waves penetrating toward the enamel. The rounded projections of enamel fit
into the shallow depressions of dentin. This interdigitation seems to contribute to a firm attachment between
dentin and enamel. The DEJ is also a hypermineralized
zone about 30 /.tm thick.
Deep invaginations occur in pit-and-fissure areas of
the occlusal surfaces of premolars and molars; such invaginations decrease enamel thickness in these areas.
These fissures act as food and bacterial traps that may
predispose the tooth to dental caries (Fig. 2-12). Occlusal
grooves, which are sound, serve an important function as

FIG 2-10 Ground section. Odontoblastic processes extend into enamel as enamel spindles.
(From Yaeger JA: Enamel. In Bhaskar SN, editor. Orban's oral histology and embryology, ed 9,
St Louis, 1980, Mosby.)

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

an escape path for the movement of food to the facial
and lingual surfaces during mastication. A functional
cusp that opposes a groove occludes on the enamel inclines on each side of the groove and not in the depth
of the groove. Therefore this arrangement leaves a
V-shaped escape path between the cusp and its opposing groove for the movement of food during chewing.
Grooves or fissures are formed at the junction of the developmental lobes of the enamel. Sound coalescence of the
lobes results in grooves; faulty coalescence results in fissures.

Enamel is incapable of repairing itself once destroyed
because the ameloblast cell degenerates following formation of the enamel rod. The final act of the ameloblast
cell is secretion of a membrane covering the end of the
enamel rod. This layer is referred to as the Nasmyth
membrane, or the primary enamel cuticle. This membrane
covers the newly erupted tooth and is worn away by
mastication and cleaning. The membrane is replaced by
an organic deposit called a pellicle, which is a precipitate
of salivary proteins. Microorganisms may invade the
pellicle to form bacterial plaque, a potential precursor to
dental disease.
Although enamel is a very hard, dense structure, it is
permeable to certain ions and molecules, permitting
both partial and complete penetration. The route of passage appears to be through structural units that are hypomineralized and rich in organic content, such as rod
sheaths, enamel cracks, and other defects. Water plays

an important role as a transporting medium through
small intercrystalline spaces. Enamel permeability decreases with age because of changes in the enamel matrix, though basic permeability is maintained; this decrease is referred to as enamel maturation.
Enamel is soluble when exposed to an acid medium,
but the dissolution is not uniform. Solubility of enamel
increases from the enamel surface to the DEJ. When fluorides are present during enamel formation or are topically applied to the enamel surface, the solubility of
surface enamel is decreased. Fluoride concentration decreases toward the DEJ. Fluoride additions can affect
the chemical and physical properties of the apatite mineral and influence the hardness, chemical reactivity, and
stability of enamel while preserving the apatite structures. Trace amounts of fluoride stabilize enamel by
lowering acid solubility, decreasing the rate of demineralization, and enhancing the rate of remineralization.
Evidence also shows that topical fluorides alter the oral
bacterial flora, thereby increasing resistance to dental
caries.
An established operative technique involves acid
etching the enamel surface for the micromechanical
"bonding" of composite restorative materials or pitand-fissure sealants directly to the etched surface. The
etchant usually is a 35% to 50% solution of phosphoric
acid. This etching produces an irregular and pitted surface with numerous microscopic undercuts by an un-

Enamel

FIG . 2-11 Vertical ground section of scalloped dentinoenamel
j unction. (From Yaeger JA: Enamel. In Bhaskar SN, editor: Orban's oral histology and embryology, ed 9, St Louis, 1980,
Mosby.)

FIG . 2-12 Fissure (f) at junction of lobes acts as food trap predisposing tooth to dental caries. e, enamel; d, dentin. (From
Gilling B, Buonocure M: J Dent Res 40:119, Jan-Feb 1961.)

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

FIG . 2-13 Odontoblastic processes (Tomes fibers),
l ying in dentinal tubules, extend from odontoblasts into dentin. (From Avery JK: Dentin. In
Bhaskar SN, editor: Orban's oral histology and
embryology, ed 9, St Louis, 1980, Mosby.)

FIG 2-14 Pattern of formation of primary dentin. This figure
also shows enamel (e) covering the anatomic crown of the
tooth and cementum (c) covering the anatomic root. (From
Scott JN, Symons NBB: I ntroduction to dental anatomy, ed 7,
Edinburgh , 1974, Churchill Livingstone.)

even dissolution of enamel rod heads and tails. Composite or pit-and-fissure sealant is bonded to the enamel
surface by resin tags formed in the acid-etched enamel
rod structures. Therefore the structure of enamel can be
an asset when it is subjected to purposeful and con-

D

trolled acid dissolution of the enamel rods to provide
this microretention for composite or sealant.
Pulp-Dentin Complex. Dentin and pulp tissues are
specialized connective tissues of mesodermal origin,
formed from the dental papilla of the tooth bud. These
two tissues are considered by many investigators as a
single tissue, which thus form the pulp-dentin complex,
with mineralized dentin comprising the mature endproduct of cell differentiation and maturation. Dentin is
formed by cells called odontoblasts. Cdontoblasts are
considered part of both dentin and pulp tissues because
their cell bodies are in the pulp cavity but their long,
slender cytoplasmic cell processes (Tomes fibers) extend
well into the tubules in the mineralized dentin (Fig.
2-13). It is because of these odontoblastic cell processes
that dentin is considered living tissue with the capability to react to physiologic and pathologic stimuli. Such
stimuli can result in changes throughout the life of the
tooth, such as secondary dentin, reparative dentin, sclerotic dentin, and dead tracts. Dentin and pulp are discussed separately in the following sections.
ENTIN
forms the largest portion of the tooth struc
Lure, extending almost the full length of the tooth. Externally, dentin is covered by enamel on the anatomic
crown and cementum on the anatomic root. Internally,
dentin forms the walls of the pulp cavity (pulp chamber
and pulp canal[s]) (Fig. 2-14).
The odontoblasts begin dentin formation immediately before enamel formation by the ameloblasts.

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

FIG 2-15

Ground dentinal surface, acidetched for 5 seconds with 37% phosphoric
acid. The artificial crack shows part of the
dentinal tubules (T). The tubule apertures are
opened and widened by acid application.
(From Brannstrom M: Dentin and pulp in
restorative dentistry, London, 1982, Wolfe
Medical.)

begins with the odontoblasts laying
down a collagen matrix, moving from the dentinoenamel junction inward toward the pulp. Mineralization of the collagen matrix gradually follows its secretion. The most recently formed layer of dentin is always
on the pulpal surface. This unmineralized zone of
dentin is immediately next to the cell bodies of the
odontoblasts and is called predentin. Dentin formation
begins at areas subadjacent to the cusp tip or incisal
ridge and gradually spreads to the apex of the root (see
Fig. 2-14). Unlike enamel, dentin formation continues
after tooth eruption and throughout the life of the pulp.
The dentin forming the initial shape of the tooth is
called primary dentin and is usually completed 3 years
after tooth eruption (for permanent teeth).
The dentinal tubules are small canals that extend across
the entire width of dentin, from the dentinoenamel or
dentinocemental junction to the pulp (Fig. 2-15 and Fig.
2-21). Each tubule contains the cytoplasmic cell process
(Tomes fiber) of an odontoblast. Each dentinal tubule is
lined with a layer of peritubular dentin, which is much
more mineralized than the surrounding intertubular
dentin (Fig. 2-16).
The surface area of dentin is much larger at the dentinoenamel or dentinocemental junction than it is on the
pulp cavity side. Since the odontoblasts form dentin
while progressing inward toward the pulp, the tubules
are forced closer together. The number of tubules increases from 15,000 to 20,000/mmz at the DEJ to 45,000
to 65,000/mmz at the pulp.' The lumen of the tubules
also varies from the DEJ to the pulp surface. In coronal
dentin, the average diameter of tubules at the dentinoenamel junction is 0.5 to 0.9 /-tm, but this increases to
2 to 3 /.Lm at the pulp (Fig. 2-17).
The course of the dentinal tubules is a slight S-curve
in the tooth crown, but the tubules are straighter in the
Dentinogenesis

FIG . 2-16

Dentinal tubules in cross-section, 1.2 mm from
pulp. Peritubular dentin (P is more mineralized than intertubular dentin (I). (From Brannstrom M: Dentin and pulp in
restorative dentistry, London, 1982, Wolfe Medical.)

incisal ridges, cusps, and root areas (Fig. 2-18). The ends
of the tubules are perpendicular to the dentinoenamel
and dentinocemental junctions. Along the tubule walls
are small lateral openings called canaliculi. As the odontoblastic process proceeds from the cell in the pulp to
the DEJ, lateral secondary branches extend into the
canaliculi and appear to communicate with lateral extensions of adjacent odontoblastic processes. Near the
DEJ the tubules (with processes seen in young teeth) divide into several terminal branches, thus forming an intercommunicating and anastomosing network (Fig. 2-19).

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

FIG 2-17 Tubules in superficial dentin close to the dentinoenamel junction (A), are smaller and more sparsely distributed
compared to deep dentin (B). The tubules in superficial root
dentin (C), and deep root dentin (D) are smaller and less numerous than those in comparable depths of coronal dentin.
(From Trowbridge HO: Dentistry '82 2:22, 1982; modified by
DH Pashley.)

FIG. 2-18 Ground section of human incisor. Course of dentinal
tubules is in a slight S-curve in the crown but rather straight at
the incisal tip and in the root. (From Avery JK Dentin. In
Bhaskar SN, editor: Orban's oral histology and embryology,
ed 9, St Louis, 1980, Mosby.)

FIG . 2-19 Ground section showing dentinal tubules and their
l ateral branching close to the dentinoenamel junction. (From
Scott JH, Symons NBB: I ntroduction to dental anatomy, ed 7,
Edinburgh, 1974, Churchill Livingstone.)

After the primary dentin is formed, dentin deposition
continues at a reduced rate even without obvious external stimuli, though the rate and amount of this physiologic secondary dentin varies considerably among individuals. In secondary dentin the tubules take a slightly
different directional pattern in contrast to primary
dentin (Fig. 2-20). Secondary dentin forms on all internal aspects of the pulp cavity, but in the pulp chamber
in multirooted teeth it tends to be thicker on the roof
and floor than on the side walls.20
Reparative dentin (tertiary dentin) is formed by replacement odontoblasts (termed secondary odontoblasts) in response to moderate-level irritants, such as attrition,
abrasion, erosion, trauma, moderate-rate dentinal
caries, and some operative procedures. It usually appears as a localized dentin deposit on the wall of the
pulp cavity immediately subadjacent to the area on the
tooth that has received the injury (a dentin deposit underneath the affected tubules) (Fig. 2-21). For example,
reparative dentin usually is formed when teeth are mechanically prepared to within 1.5 mm of the pulp.21 The
cut fibers (odontoblastic processes) die along with the
corresponding odontoblasts, leaving dead tracts (described in the next paragraph). In about 15 days new
odontoblasts are differentiated from mesenchymal cells
of the pulp, and these replacement odontoblasts lay
down the reparative dentin. Reparative dentin is confined to the localized irritated area of the pulp cavity
wall, becomes apparent microscopically about 1 month
from the inception of the stimulus, is structurally and
chemically different from primary and secondary
dentin, and, being highly atubular, is impervious to
most irritants. Reparative or tertiary dentin is a defense
reaction to an area of moderate-intensity injury.
Thus when moderate-level stimuli are applied to
dentin, such as moderate-rate caries or attrition, the affected odontoblastic processes may die with the associated odontoblasts. These areas of dentin are called dead
tracts and extend from the external dentin surface to the

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

Secondary
dentin

F I G2-20
.
Ground section of dentin with pulpal
surface at right. Dentinal tubules curve sharply as
they move from primary to secondary dentin.
Dentinal tubules are more irregular in shape in
secondary dentin. (From Avery JK. Dentin. In
Bhaskar SN, editor. Orban's oral histology and
embryology, ed 9, St Louis, 1980, Mosby.)

FIG 2-21 Cross-section illustrating dead
tracts and reparative dentin caused by degeneration of odontoblasts in pulpal horns
and exposure of dentinal tubules to erosion on root surface, respectively. (From
Avery JK. Dentin. In Bhaskar SN, editor.
Orban's oral histology and embryology, ed
9, St Louis, 1980, Mosby.)

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

pulp. The tubules are empty and thus appear black
when ground sections of dentin are viewed microscopically with transmitted light. Dead tracts are sealed off at
the pulpal surface by reparative dentin formed by replacement odontoblasts. While dead tracts are commonly associated with areas of caries or attrition, they
have occurred in unerupted incisors and teeth that
show few, if any, obvious external defects. Dead tracts
may be considered in some circumstances as a form of
age-related change associated with the death of odontoblasts. Usually this occurs in areas of the pulp where the
odontoblasts have been crowded into narrow pulp
horns (see Fig. 2-21). In dried, ground sections of normal teeth the odontoblastic processes contract and may
allow the tubules to fill with air, giving the appearance
of a dead tract. However, a true dead tract can be distinguished by a deposit of reparative dentin on the pulpal surface .z°
Sclerotic dentin results from aging or mild irritation
(such as slowly advancing caries) and causes a change
in the composition of the primary dentin. The peritubular dentin becomes wider, gradually filling the tubules
with calcified material, progressing pulpally from the
DEJ (Fig. 2-22). These areas are harder, denser, less sensitive, and more protective of the pulp against subsequent irritations. Sclerosis resulting from aging is physiologic dentin sclerosis; sclerosis resulting from a mild
irritation is reactive dentin sclerosis. Reactive dentin sclerosis often can be seen radiographically in the form of a
more radiopaque (lighter) area in the S-shape of the
tubules. Eburnated dentin refers to the outward (exposed) portion of reactive sclerotic dentin, where slow
caries has destroyed formerly overlying tooth structure,
leaving a hard, darkened, cleanable surface.
The composition of human dentin is approximately
75% inorganic material, 20% organic material, and 5%
water and other materials. Dentin is less mineralized
than enamel but more mineralized than cementum or
bone. The mineral content of dentin increases with age.
This mineral phase is composed primarily of hydroxyapatite crystallites, which are arranged in a less systematic manner than enamel crystallites. Dentinal crystallites are smaller than enamel crystallites, having a
length of 200 to 1000 A and a width of about 30 A, similar to the sizes seen in bone and cementum. The organic phase of dentin consists primarily of collagen.
Dentin is significantly softer than enamel but harder
than bone or cementum. The hardness of dentin averages one fifth that of enamel, and its hardness near the
DEJ is about three times greater than near the pulp.
Dentin becomes harder with age, primarily due to increases in mineral content. While dentin is a hard, mineralized tissue, it is somewhat flexible, with a modulus of
elasticity of 1.67 X 106 PSI. This flexibility helps support
the more brittle, nonresilient enamel. Often small "craze
lines" are seen in the enamel that indicate minute frac-

FIG. 2-22

Sclerotic dentin occurring under enamel caries with
early penetration of dentin caries along enamel lamella. (From
Schour l: Noyes oral histology and embryology, Philadelphia,
1960, Lea & Febiger.)

tures of that structure. These craze lines usually are not
clinically significant unless associated with cracks in the
underlying dentin. Dentin is not as prone to cleavage
as is the enamel rod structure. The tensile strength of
dentin is approximately 40 MPa (6000 PSI), which is less
than cortical bone and approximately one half that
of enamel. The compressive strength of dentin is much
higher-266 MPa (40,000 PSI).
During tooth preparation, dentin is usually distinguished from enamel by: (1) color, (2) reflectance, (3)
hardness, and (4) sound. Dentin is normally yellowwhite and slightly darker than enamel. In older patients
dentin is darker, and it can become brown or black in
cases where it has been exposed to oral fluids, old
restorative materials, or slowly advancing caries. Dentin surfaces are more opaque and dull, being less reflective to light than similar enamel surfaces, which appear
shiny. Dentin is softer than enamel and provides greater
yield to the pressure of a sharp explorer tine, which
tends to catch and hold in dentin. When moving an explorer tine over the tooth, enamel surfaces provide a
sharper, higher-pitched sound than dentin surfaces.
Sensitivity is encountered whenever odontoblasts
and their processes are stimulated during operative

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

FIG 2-24

Ground section of mesiooclusodistal (MOD) tooth
preparation on third molar. Dark blue dye was placed in the
pulp chamber under pressure after tooth preparation. Dark areas of dye penetration (D) show that dentinal tubules of axial
walls are much more permeable than those of pulpal floor of
preparation.

FIG

2-23 Stimuli that induce fluid movements in dentinal
tubules distort odontoblasts and afferent nerves (arrow), leadi ng to a sensation of pain. Many operative procedures such as
cutting or air-drying induce such fluid movement. (From
Brannstrom M: Dentin and pulp in restorative dentistry, Lon-

don, 1982, Wolfe Medical.)

procedures, even though the pain receptor mechanism
appears to be within the dentinal tubules near the pulp.
A variety of physical, thermal, chemical, bacterial, and
traumatic stimuli are transmitted through the dentinal
tubules, though the precise mechanism of the transmissive elements of sensation has not been conclusively established. The most accepted theory of pain transmission is the hydrodynamic theory, which accounts for pain
transmission through small, rapid movements of fluid
that occur within the dentinal tubules . 2 Because many
tubules contain mechanoreceptor nerve endings near
the pulp, small fluid movements in the tubules arising
from cutting, drying, pressure changes, osmotic shifts,
or changes in temperature account for the majority of
pain transmission (Fig. 2-23).
Dentinal tubules are normally filled with odontoblastic processes and dentinal fluid, a transudate of plasma.
When enamel or cementum is removed during tooth
preparation, the external seal of dentin is lost and the
tubules become fluid-filled channels from the cut surface directly to the pulp. Fortunately, pulpal fluid has a
slight positive pressure that forces fluid outward toward any breach in the external seal. Permeability studies of dentin indicate that tubules are functionally much
smaller than would be indicated by their measured microscopic dimensions as a result of numerous constrictions along their paths (see Fig. 2-16). 15 Dentin permeability is not uniform throughout the tooth. Coronal
dentin is much more permeable than root dentin. There
are also differences within coronal dentin (Fig. 2-24). 22

FIG .

2-25

Horizontal section in occlusal third of molar crown.

Dark blue dye was placed in the pulp chamber under pressure.
Deep dentin areas (over pulp horns) are much more permeable than superficial dentin. (Reprinted from Pashley DH et al:

Regional variability in the permeability of human dentin, Arch
Oral Biol 32(7):519-523, 1987, with permission from Pergamon, Headington Hill Hall, Oxford 0X3 OBW, UK.)

Dentin permeability is primarily dependent on the remaining dentin thickness (i.e., length of the tubules) and
the diameter of the tubules. Since the tubules are
shorter, become more numerous, and increase in diameter closer to the pulp, deep dentin is a less-effective pulpal barrier than is superficial dentin near the dentinoenamel or dentinocemental junctions (Fig. 2-25).
Dentin must be treated with great care during restorative procedures to minimize damage to the odontoblasts
and pulp. Air-water spray should be used whenever

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

A, Excessive drying of tooth preparations can cause
odontoblasts to be aspirated into dentinal tubules. B, Nuclei
are seen as dark rods in dentinal tubules. (From Brannstr(5m
M: Dentin and pulp in restorative dentistry, London, 1982,
Wolfe Medical.)
FIG. 2-26

FIG 2-28 Smear layer on cut dentin preparation surface.
Swirls on surface are from end of a carbide bur. (From Marshall GW, Marshall SJ, Bayne SC: Restorative dental materials:
scanning electron microscopy and x-ray microanalysis, Scanning Microsc 2(4):2007-2028, 1988.)

FIG 2-27 Cross-section of dentin showing an acid-etched
tooth preparation left unsealed intraorally for one week. Microorganisms (B) can be seen in vertically fractured, widened
dentinal tubules. The peritubular zone has been removed.
(From Olgart L, Brannstrom M, Johnson G: Invasion of bacteria into dentinal tubules, Acta Odontol Scand 32:61-70, 1974.)

cutting with high-speed handpieces to avoid heat
buildup. The dentin should not be dehydrated by compressed air blasts; it should always maintain its normal
fluid content (Fig. 2-26). Protection is also provided by
j udicious use of liners, bases, dentin-bonding agents,
and nontoxic restorative materials. Restorations must

adequately seal the preparation to avoid microleakage
and bacterial penetration (Fig. 2-27).
Whenever dentin has been cut or abraded, a thin altered layer is created on the surface. This smear layer is
only a few micrometers thick and is composed of denatured collagen, hydroxyapatite, and other cutting debris
(Fig. 2-28). The smear layer serves as a natural bandage
over the cut dentinal surface because it occludes many
of the dentinal tubules with debris called smear plugs
(Fig. 2-29). While the smear layer is a good protective
barrier, it has a relatively weak attachment to the dentin
and is subject to dissolution by acids.
Reliable dentin bonding of composite restorations has
been a difficult goal for dental manufacturers. While

C H A PT E R 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

FIG. 2-31 Most dentin bonding systems remove or solubilize
smear layer, allowing resins to penetrate and form "hybrid
l ayer" with dentin structures. Ideally, smear plugs would not
be removed. (From Pashley DH: The effects of acid etching on
the pulpodentin complex, Oper Dent 17(6):229-242, 1992.)

FIG . 2-29 Smear layer (SL) in cross-section. Smear plugs (SP)
are formed from cutting debris forced into tubules. The smear
l ayer and smear plugs greatly reduce the permeability of cut
dentin surface. (From Pashley DH: Dentin: a dynamic substrate, Scanning Microsc 3(1):161-176, 1989.)

FIG. 2-30 Smear layer removed from deep human dentin with
0.5M ethylene diamine tetracetic acid (EDTA). (Courtesy of DH
Pashley.)

some manufacturers claim their products create chemical bonds to dentin, most experts agree that the primary
mechanism of attachment is mechanical interlocking.
Most dentin-bonding systems have acids that remove
the smear layer and partially demineralize the intertubular dentin. In most systems these acidic components are weaker than the 37% phosphoric acid commonly used to etch enamel surfaces. When viewed
under high magnification, dentin without a smear has
many irregularities for micromechanical retention (Fig.
2-30). Ideally, such etchants remove the smear layer but
leave the smear plugs because they greatly reduce

FIG. 2-32 Cross-sectional transmission electron micrograph
of resin restoration bonded to dentin. Dentin-bonding agent
has extensive penetration into dentin structures. The hybrid
l ayer (H) i s i n the middle, with resin (R) above and dentin (D)
below. (From Nakabayashi N, Takarada K. Effect of HEMA on
bonding to dentin, Dent Mater 8(2):125-130, 1992.)

dentin permeability and sensitivity. Etchants should not
excessively damage exposed collagen fibers because
much of the bond strength develops from resin encapsulating these fibers . 23 After the acids, hydrophilic adhesive resins are applied that penetrate into the inherently
moist dentin surfaces and copolymerize with the composite restoration.
While some of the bond forms
from resin "tags" extending into the dentinal tubules,
most of the bond strength develops from resin that penetrates and adapts to the demineralized intertubular
dentin and exposed collagen fibers. The resultant resin
interdiffusion zone is often termed the hybrid layer (Figs.
2-31 and 2-32).

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

FIG . 2-33 As an alternative to restoration, sensitivity from exposed and abraded root surfaces (a) can be reduced by the application of dentin bonding agents.

While dentin bond strengths have improved, they are
variable because of the dentin substrate. Bond strengths
for superficial dentin close to the dentinoenamel or
dentinocemental junctions are greater than those for
deep dentin. In deep dentin the greater number of
tubules and the larger diameter of tubules reduce the
amount of intertubular dentin available for bonding.
An important aspect of current dentin-bonding
agents is their ability to seal cut dentinal surfaces and
thus reduce permeability and microleakage. Many dentists use dentin-bonding products to seal and desensitize dentin surfaces in all tooth preparations and in unrestored Class V cervical abrasion and erosion defects
(Fig. 2-33).
The dental pulp occupies the pulp cavity in the tooth.
Each pulp organ is circumscribed by the dentin and is
lined peripherally by a cellular layer of odontoblasts adj acent to the dentin. Anatomically the pulp organ is divided into: (1) coronal pulp located in the pulp chamber
in the crown portion of the tooth, including the pulp
horns that are directed toward the incisal ridges and
cusp tips; and (2) radicular pulp located in the pulp
canal(s) in the root portion of the tooth. The radicular
pulp is continuous with the periapical tissues by connecting through the apical foramen or foramina of the
root. Accessory canals may extend from the pulp
canal(s) laterally through the root dentin to the periodontal tissues. The shape of each pulp conforms generally to the shape of each tooth (see Fig. 2-3).
The dental pulp is composed of myelinated and unmyelinated nerves, arteries, veins, lymph channels, connective tissue cells, intercellular substance, odontoblasts, fibroblasts, macrophages, collagen, and fine
fibers. The central area of the pulp contains the large
blood vessels and nerve trunks. The pulp is circumscribed peripherally by a specialized odontogenic area
made up of the odontoblasts, the cell-free zone, and the
cell-rich zone.
The pulp is a unique, specialized organ of the human
body serving four functions: (1) formative or developmental, (2) nutritive, (3) sensory or protective, and (4)

defensive or reparative. The formative function is the
production of primary and secondary dentin by the
odontoblasts. The nutritive function supplies nutriments and moisture to the dentin through the blood
vascular supply to the odontoblasts and their processes.
The sensory function provides sensory nerve fibers
within the pulp to mediate the sensation of pain. Dentin
receptors are unique because various stimuli elicit only
pain as a response. The pulp usually does not differentiate between heat, touch, pressure, or chemicals. Motor
fibers initiate reflexes in the muscles of the blood vessel
walls for the control of circulation in the pulp. Finally,
the defensive function of the pulp is related primarily to
its response to irritation by mechanical, thermal, chemical, or bacterial stimuli. Such irritants can cause the degeneration and death of the affected odontoblastic
processes and corresponding odontoblasts and the formation of replacement odontoblasts (from undifferentiated pulpal mesenchymal cells) that lay down irregular
or reparative dentin. The deposition of reparative
dentin acts as a protective barrier against caries and various other irritating factors. This is a continuous but relatively slow process, taking 100 days to form a reparative dentin layer 0.12 mm thick. In cases of severe
irritation the pulp responds by an inflammatory reaction similar to that for any other soft tissue injury. However, the inflammation may become irreversible and can
result in the death of the pulp because the confined,
rigid structure of the dentin limits the inflammatory response and the ability of the pulp to recover.
If, however, the irritant is very mild, such as that
caused by cutting the odontoblastic processes more than
1.5 mm external to the pulp at high speed with airwater coolant during tooth preparation, no replacement
odontoblasts are formed; thus no reparative dentin is
created, even though the processes and corresponding
odontoblasts have died. Therefore there is no barrier
(except for the smear layer) between the dead tracts remaining and the pulp. This may explain why many
teeth have pulpal problems following tooth preparation
and restoration. However, newer dentin-bonding systems look promising for sealing the cut dentinal surfaces and preventing postoperative sensitivity.
A knowledge of the contour and size of the pulp cavity is essential during tooth preparation. In general, the
pulp cavity is a miniature contour of the external surface of the tooth. Size varies among the various teeth in
the same mouth and among individuals. With advancing age, the pulp cavity usually decreases in size. Radiographs are an invaluable aid in determining the size
of the pulp cavity and any existing pathologic condition
(Fig. 2-34). Also with advanced age, the pulp generally
becomes more fibrous because of past episodes of various irritations, and it may contain pulp stones or denticles. The latter are nodular, calcified masses usually appearing in the pulp chamber but also in the pulp canal.

CHAPTER2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

FIG . 2-34 Pulp cavity size. A, Premolar radiograph of young person. B, Premolar radiograph of older person. Note the difference in the size of the pulp cavity (arrows).
(From Shankle RJ: Clinical dental anatomy,
physiology, and histology. In Sturdevant
CM et al, editors: The art and science of
operative dentistry, ed 1, New York, 1968,
McGraw-Hill.)

These may either be attached to the pulp cavity wall or
free in the mass of pulp tissue.
Clinical interpretation of pain from pulpal inflammation is somewhat empiric, but it is nonetheless important to the successful practice of operative dentistry.
One of the primary services rendered by the dentist is
diagnosis and relief of pain of pulpal origin.
When an irritant (e.g., sugar, cold, acid from caries)
first contacts dentin, the patient may be alerted by a
twinge of pain. This pain is usually only momentary,
ceasing if the irritant is removed. If such irritation continues or the irritant is applied repeatedly, hyperemia (increased blood flow and volume) and inflammation of
the pulp can result, which will cause the pain elicited
from the irritation to linger a few seconds. The reaction
is because the pulp is contained by unyielding dentinal
walls; thus drainage of the increased blood is limited by
the constricted apical foramen. As long as an irritant,
such as touching ice to the tooth, causes pain that
lingers no more than 10 to 15 seconds after removal of
the irritant, resolution of the hyperemia by immediate
restorative treatment is a possibility; such hyperemia is
termed reversible pulpitis.
When pulpal pain, either spontaneous or elicited by
an irritant, lingers more than 15 seconds, infection of the
pulp often has occurred and resolution by operative
dentistry treatment is usually doubtful; root canal therapy is advised for this pulpal condition, termed irreversible pulpitis, if the tooth is to be maintained in the
dentition. When this condition is untreated, suppuration and pulpal necrosis follows, characterized by spontaneous, continuous throbbing pain or pain elicited by
heat that can be relieved by cold and later characterized
by no response to any stimulus. Pulpal necrosis is
treated by root canal therapy or tooth extraction.
A primary objective during operative procedures
must be preservation of the health of the pulp. The successful management of the disease process by proper
treatment of the pulp organ is discussed further in later
chapters.
Cementum. Cementum is the hard dental tissue covering the anatomic roots of teeth and is formed by cells
known as cementoblasts, which develop from undifferen-

tiated mesenchymal cells in the connective tissue of the
dental follicle. Cementum is slightly softer than dentin
and consists of about 45% to 50% inorganic material
(hydroxyapatite) by weight and 50% to 55% organic
matter and water by weight. The organic portion is primarily composed of collagen and protein polysaccharides. Sharpey's fibers are the portions of the collagenous
principal fibers of the periodontal ligament embedded
in both the cementum and alveolar bone to attach the
tooth to the alveolus (Fig. 2-35). Cementum is avascular.
The cementum is light yellow and slightly lighter in
color than dentin. It has the highest fluoride content of
all mineralized tissue. Cementum is also permeable to a
variety of materials. It is formed continuously throughout life, because a new layer of cementum is deposited
to keep the attachment intact as the superficial layer of
cementum ages. Two kinds of cementum are formed:
acellular and cellular. The acellular layer of cementum is
living tissue that does not incorporate cells into its structure and usually predominates on the coronal half of
the root; cellular cementum occurs more frequently on the
apical half. Cementum on the root end surrounds the
apical foramen and may extend slightly onto the inner
wall of the pulp canal. Cementum thickness can increase on the root end to compensate for attritional wear
of the occlusal/incisal surface and passive eruption of
the tooth.
The cementodentinal junction is a relatively smooth
area in the permanent tooth, and attachment of cementum to the dentin is firm but not understood completely.
The cementum joins the enamel to form the cementoenamel junction, which is referred to as the cervical line.
In about 10% of teeth, enamel and cementum do not
meet, and this can result in a sensitive area. Abrasion,
erosion, caries, scaling, and the procedures of finishing
and polishing may result in denuding the dentin of its
cementum covering, which can cause the dentin to be
sensitive to several types of stimuli (e.g., heat, cold,
sweet and sour substances). Cementum is capable of repairing itself to a limited degree and is not resorbed under normal conditions. Some resorption of the apical
portion of the root often occurs during physiologic
tooth movement (Fig. 2-36).

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

FIG . 2-35 Principal fibers of periodontal ligament con-

tinue to course into surface layer of cementum as
Sharpey's fibers. (From Armitage GC: Cementum. In
Bhaskar SN, editor. Orban's oral histology and embryology, ed 9, St Louis, 1980, Mosby.)

Dentin

Cementum

PHYSIOLOGY OF TOOTH FORM
Function. The teeth serve four main functions: (1) mastication, (2) esthetics, (3) speech, and (4) protection of
supporting tissues. Normal tooth form and proper alignment ensure efficiency in the incising and reduction of
food with the various tooth classes-incisors, canines,
premolars, and molars-performing specific functions in
the masticatory process. In esthetics the form and alignment of the anterior teeth are important to a person's
physical appearance. The form and alignment of both anterior and posterior teeth assist in the articulation of certain sounds that can have a significant effect on speech.
Finally, the form and alignment of the teeth assist in sustaining the teeth in the dental arches by assisting in the
development and protection of the gingival tissues and
alveolar bone that support them.
Contours. The facial and lingual surfaces possess
some degree of convexity that affords protection and
stimulation of the supporting tissues during mastication. This convexity generally is located at the cervical
third of the crown on the facial surfaces of all teeth and
the lingual surfaces of the incisors and canines. The lingual surfaces of the posterior teeth usually have their
height of contour in the middle third of the crown. Normal tooth contours act in deflecting food only to the extent that the passing food stimulates (by gentle massage) rather than irritates the investing tissues. If these
curvatures are too great, the tissues usually receive in-

FIG. 2-36 Radiograph showing root resorption on lateral in-

cisor following orthodontic tooth movement.

adequate stimulation by the passage of food. Too little
contour may result in trauma to the attachment apparatus. These tooth contours must be considered in the performance of operative dental procedures. Improper location and degree of facial or lingual convexities can result
in serious complications, as illustrated in Fig. 2-37,
where the proper facial contour is disregarded in the
placement of a cervical restoration on a mandibular molar. Overcontouring is the worst offender, usually resulting in
flabby, red-colored, chronically inflamed gingiva and increased plaque retention.
Proper form of the proximal surfaces of the teeth is just as

important to the maintenance of the periodontal tissues
as proper form of the facial and lingual surfaces. The

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

FIG 2-37 Contours. Arrows show pathways of food passing over facial surface of mandibular
molar during mastication. A, Overcontour deflects food from gingiva and results in understimulation of supporting tissues. B, Undercontour of tooth may result in irritation of soft tissues.
C, Correct contour permits adequate stimulation for supporting tissues, resulting in healthy condition. (From BrauerJC, Richardson RE: The dental assistant, ed 3, New York, 1964, McGraw-Hill.)

FIG . 2-38 Portion of the skull, showing triangular spaces beneath proximal contact areas. These spaces are occupied by
soft tissue and bone for support of teeth

proximal height of contour serves to provide: (1) contacts
with the proximal surfaces of the adjacent teeth, which
prevents food impaction; and (2) adequate embrasure
space gingivally of the contacts for the gingival tissue,
supporting bone, blood vessels, and nerves that serve
the supporting structures (Fig. 2-38).
Proximal Contact Area. Proximal contact area denotes
the area of proximal height of contour of the mesial or
distal surface of a tooth that touches (contacts) its adjacent tooth in the same arch. When teeth erupt to make
proximal contact with previously erupted teeth, there is
initially a contact point. The contact point becomes an
area because of wear of one proximal surface against another during physiologic tooth movement (Figs. 2-39
and 2-40).
The physiologic significance of properly formed and
located proximal contacts cannot be overemphasized;
they promote normal healthy interdental papillae filling
of the interproximal spaces. Improper contacts can result in food impaction between the teeth, producing periodontal disease, carious lesions, and possible movement of the teeth. In addition, retention of food is
objectionable by its physical presence and by the halitosis that results from food decomposition. Proximal contacts and interdigitation of the teeth through occlusal
contacts stabilizes and maintains the integrity of the
dental arches.

FIG. 2-39 Embrasure form. w, Improper embrasure form
caused by overcontouring of restoration resulting in unhealthy gingiva from lack of stimulation. x, Good embrasure
form. y, Frictional wear of contact area has resulted in decrease of embrasure dimension. z, When embrasure form is
good, supporting tissues receive adequate stimulation from
foods during mastication. (From Brauer JC, Richardson RE:
The dental assistant, ed 3, New York, 1964, McGraw-Hill.)

The proximal contact area is located in the incisal
third of the approximating surfaces of the maxillary and
mandibular central incisors (Fig. 2-41). It is positioned
slightly facial to the center of the proximal surface faciolingually (see Fig. 2-40). Proceeding posteriorly from
the incisor region through all the remaining teeth, the
contact area is located near the junction of the incisal (or
occlusal) and middle thirds or in the middle third. Because of these contacts being positioned progressively
lower cervically (see Fig. 2-41), larger incisal or occlusal
embrasures result posteriorly. Restorative procedures
require maintenance of correct proximal contact relationships between teeth, which results in correct embrasures.
Embrasures. Embrasures are V-shaped spaces that
originate at the proximal contact areas between adjacent
teeth and are named for the direction toward which
they radiate. These embrasures are: (1) facial, (2) lingual,
(3) incisal or occlusal, and (4) gingival (see Figs. 2-40
and 2-41).

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

A
FIG 2-40 Proximal contact area. Black lines show positions of contacts faciolingually. A, Maxill ary teeth. B, Mandibular teeth. Facial and lingual embrasures are indicated.

FIG 2-41 Proximal contact area. Black lines show positions of contacts incisogingivally and occlusogingivally. Incisal, occlusal, and gingival embrasures are
i ndicated. A, Maxillary teeth. B, Mandibular teeth.

Contact area

Initially the interdental papilla fills the gingival embrasure. In a mouth where tooth form and function are
ideal and optimal oral health is maintained, the interdental papilla may continue in this position throughout
life. When the gingival embrasure is filled by the
papilla, trapping of food in this region is prevented. In
a faciolingual vertical section, the papilla may be triangular between anterior teeth, whereas in the posterior
teeth the papilla may be shaped like a mountain range,
with facial and lingual peaks and the col ("valley") lying
beneath the contact area (Fig. 2-42). This col, a central
faciolingual concave area beneath the contact, is more
vulnerable to periodontal disease from incorrect contact
and embrasure form because it is covered by nonkeratinized epithelium.

FIG . 2-42 Relationship of ideal interdental papilla to molar
contact area. (From Shankle RJ: Clinical dental anatomy,
physiology, and histology. In Sturdevant CM et al, editors:
The art and science of operative dentistry, ed 1, New York,
1968, McGraw-Hill.)

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

FIG 2-43 Maxillary and mandibular
first molars in centric occlusal relationship. Note the grooves for escape
of food.

tional movement of the tongue, lips, and cheeks. Failure
to understand and adhere to correct anatomic form in
the performance of restorative procedures can contribute to the breakdown of the stomatognathic system
(Fig. 2-45), and the importance of providing correct
anatomic features in restorative dentistry cannot be
overemphasized.
FIG . 2-44 Embrasure form. x, Portion of tooth that offers protection to underlying supporting tissue during mastication. y,
Restoration fails to establish adequate contour for good embrasure form. (From Brauer JC, Richardson RE: The dental assistant, ed 3, New York, 1964, McGraw-Hill.)

The correct relationships of embrasures, cusps to
sulci, marginal ridges, and grooves of adjacent and opposing teeth provide for the escape of food from the occlusal surfaces during mastication (Fig. 2-43). When an
embrasure is decreased in size or absent, additional
stress is created in the teeth and the supporting structures during mastication. Embrasures that are too large
provide little protection to the supporting structures as
food is forced into the interproximal space by an opposing cusp. A prime example is the failure to restore the
distal cusp of a mandibular first molar when placing a
restoration (Fig. 2-44). The lingual embrasures are usually larger than the facial embrasures to allow more
food to be displaced lingually, because the tongue can
return the food to the occlusal surface easier than if the
food is displaced facially into the buccal vestibule (see
Fig. 2-40).
The marginal ridges of adjacent posterior teeth
should be at the same height to have proper contact and
embrasure forms. When this relationship is absent,
there is an increase in the problems associated with
weak contacts and faulty embrasure form.
Preservation of the curvatures of the opposing cusps
and surfaces in function maintains masticatory efficiency throughout life (see Fig. 2-2). Correct anatomic
form renders the teeth more self-cleansing because of
the smoothly rounded contours that are more exposed
to the cleansing action of foods and fluids and the fric-

MAXILLA AND MANDIBLE
The human maxilla is formed by two bones, the maxilla
proper and the premaxilla. These two bones form the
bulk of the upper jaw and the major portion of the hard
palate and help form the floor of the orbit and the sides
and base of the nasal cavity. They initially contain the 10
maxillary primary teeth and later contain the 16 maxillary permanent teeth in the alveolar process (see Figs. 2-1
and 2-3, label 7).
The mandible forms the lower jaw (see Fig. 2-52, F). It
is horseshoe shaped and relates to the skull on either
side via the temporomandibular joints (see Fig. 2-52, B).
The mandible is composed of a body of two horizontal
portions joined at the midline symphysis mandibulae,
as well as the rami, the vertical parts. The coronoid
process and condyle make up the superior border of
each ramus. The mandible initially contains the 10
mandibular primary teeth and later the 16 mandibular
permanent teeth in the alveolar process.
The maxillary and mandibular bones consist of about
65% inorganic and 35% organic material. The inorganic
portion is hydroxyapatite; the organic part is primarily
collagen.
ORAL MUCOSA
The oral mucoua is the mucous membrane that covers
all oral structures except the clinical crowns of the teeth.
It is composed of two layers: (1) the stratified squamous
epithelium and (2) supporting connective tissue, called
the lamina propria. (See the lamina propria of the gingiva
in Fig. 2-46, arrow 8.) The epithelium may be keratinized, parakeratinized, or nonkeratinized depending
upon its location. The lamina propria varies in thickness

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

FIG . 2-45 Poor anatomic restorative form. A, Radiograph of flat contact and amalgam gingival
excess. B, Radiograph of restoration with amalgam gingival excess and absence of contact resulting in trauma to supporting tissue. C, Poor occlusal margins.

The oral mucosa may be divided into three major
functional types: (1) masticatory mucosa, (2) lining or
reflective mucosa, and (3) specialized mucosa.
The masticatory mucosa is composed of the free and attached gingiva (see Fig. 2-46, arrows 6 and 9) and the mucosa of the hard palate. The epithelium of these tissues
is keratinized, and the lamina propria is a dense, thick,
firm connective tissue containing collagenous fibers.
The hard palate has a distinct submucosa except for a
few narrow specific zones. The dense lamina propria of
the attached gingiva is connected to the cementum
and the periosteum of the bony alveolar process (see
Fig. 2-46, arrow 8).
The lining or reflective mucosa covers the inside of the

FIG . 2-46 Vertical section of maxillary incisor illustrating supporting structures: 1, enamel; 2, dentin; 3, pulp; 4, gingival sulcus; 5, free gingival margin; 6, free gingiva; 7, free gingival
groove; 8, lamina propria of gingiva; 9, attached gingiva; 10,
mucogingival junction; 11, periodontal ligament; 12, alveolar
bone; 13, cementum; 14, alveolar mucosa.
and supports the epithelium. It may be attached to the
periosteum of the alveolar bone, or it may be interposed
over the submucosa, which may vary in different regions of the mouth (e.g., the floor of the mouth, the soft
palate). The submucosa, consisting of connective tissues
varying in density and thickness, attaches the mucous
membrane to the underlying bony structures. The submucosa contains glands, blood vessels, nerves, and adipose tissue.

lips, cheek, vestibule, lateral surfaces of the alveolar
process (except the mucosa of the hard palate), floor of
the mouth, soft palate, and inferior surface of the
tongue. Lining mucosa is a thin, movable tissue with a
relatively thick, nonkeratinized epithelium and a thin
lamina propria. The submucosa is composed mostly of
thin, loose connective tissue with muscle and collagenous and elastic fibers, with different areas varying
from one another in their structure. The junction of lining mucosa with masticatory mucosa is the mucogingival
junction, located at the apical border of the attached gingiva facially and lingually in the mandibular arch and
facially in the maxillary arch (see Fig. 2-46, arrow 10).
The specialized mucosa covers the dorsum of the
tongue and the taste buds. The epithelium is nonkeratinized except for the covering of the dermal filiform
papillae.

PERIODONTIUM
The periodontium consists of the oral hard and soft tissues that invest and support the teeth. It can be divided
into: (1) the gingival unit, consisting of free and attached
gingiva and the alveolar mucosa, and (2) the attachment
apparatus, consisting of the cementum, periodontal ligament, and alveolar process (see Fig. 2-46). The peri-

C H A PT E R 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

odontium, a connective tissue structure with its stratified squamous epithelium, attaches the teeth to the
maxilla and the mandible and provides a continually
adapting structure for the support of the teeth during
function. The periodontium has two mineralized connective tissues, cementum and alveolar bone, and two
fibrous connective tissues, the periodontal ligament and
the lamina propria of the gingiva. The periodontium is
attached to the jaws by alveolar bone and to the dentin
of the tooth root by cementum.
Gingival Unit. As stated previously, the free and attached gingiva are masticatory mucosa. The free gingiva
is the gingiva from the marginal crest to the level of the
base of the gingival sulcus (see Fig. 2-46, arrows 4 and 6).
The gingival sulcus is the space between the tooth and
the free gingiva. The outer wall of the sulcus (inner wall
of the free gingiva) is lined with a thin, nonkeratinized
epithelium. The outer aspect of the free gingiva in each
gingival embrasure is called the gingival or interdental
papilla. The free gingival groove is a shallow groove that
runs parallel to the marginal crest of the free gingiva
and usually indicates the level of the base of the gingival sulcus (see Fig. 2-46, arrow 7).
The attached gingiva, a dense connective tissue with
keratinized stratified squamous epithelium, extends
from the depth of the gingival sulcus (free gingival
groove) to the mucogingival junction. A dense network of
collagenous fibers connects the attached gingiva firmly
to the cementum and the periosteum of the alveolar
process (bone).
The alveolar mucosa is a thin, soft tissue that is loosely
attached to the underlying alveolar bone (see Fig. 2-46,
arrows 12 and 14). It is covered by a thin, nonkeratinized
epithelial layer. The underlying submucosa contains
loosely arranged collagen fibers, elastic tissue, fat, and
muscle tissue. The alveolar mucosa is delineated from
the attached gingiva by the mucogingival junction and
continues apically to the vestibular fornix and the inside
of the cheek.
Attachment Apparatus. The tooth root is attached to
the alveolus (bony socket) by the periodontal ligament
(see Fig. 2-46, arrow 11), which is a complex, soft, connective tissue containing numerous cells, blood vessels,
nerves, and an extracellular substance consisting of
fibers and ground substance. The majority of the fibers
are collagen, and the ground substance is composed of
a variety of proteins and polysaccharides. The periodontal ligament serves the following functions: (1) attachment and support, (2) sensory, (3) nutritive, and (4)
homeostatic. Bundles of the collagen fibers, known as
the principal fibers of the ligament, serve to attach the cementum to the alveolar bone and act as a cushion to suspend and support the tooth. The portions of the principal fibers embedded in the cementum and alveolar bone
are called Sharpey's fibers. Sensory function is provided
by the nerve supply through an efficient proprioceptive

mechanism. The blood vessels supply the attachment
apparatus with nutritive substances. Specialized cells of
the ligament function to resorb and replace the cementum, periodontal ligament, and alveolar bone.
Cementum is a hard tissue with a calcified intercellular
substance covering the anatomic roots of teeth; it has
been discussed previously in this chapter.
The alveolar process, a part of the maxilla and
mandible, forms, supports, and lines the sockets into
which the roots of the teeth fit. Anatomically, no distinct
boundary exists between the body of the maxilla or the
mandible and the alveolar process. The tissue elements
of the alveolar process are the same as for bone found
elsewhere. The alveolar process is thin, compact bone
with many small openings through which blood vessels, lymphatics, and nerves pass. As previously stated,
both cementum and the alveolar bone contain Sharpey's
fibers, the ends of the principal fibers of the periodontal
ligament. The inner wall of the bony socket consists of
the thin lamella of bone that surrounds the root of the
tooth (and gives attachment to Sharpey's fibers). It is
termed the alveolar bone proper. The second part of the
bone is called supporting alveolar bone, which surrounds
the alveolar bone proper and supports the socket. Supporting bone is made up of two parts: (1) the cortical
plate, consisting of compact bone and forming the inner
(lingual) and outer (facial) plates of the alveolar process,
and (2) the spongy base that fills the area between the
plates and the alveolar bone proper. Bone is composed
of approximately 65% inorganic and 35% organic material. The inorganic material is hydroxyapatite; the organic material is primarily type I collagen (88% to 89%),
which is surrounded by a ground substance of glycoproteins and proteoglycans.
Clinically, the level of the gingival attachment and
gingival sulcus is an important factor in restorative dentistry. Soft tissue health must be maintained by the teeth
having correct form and position if apical recession of
the gingiva and possible abrasion and erosion of the
roots are to be prevented. The margin of a tooth preparation should not be positioned subgingivally (at levels between
the marginal crest of the free gingiva and the base of the sulcus) unless dictated by caries, previous restoration, esthetics,
or other preparation needs.

OCCLUSION
Occlusion literally means "closing"; in dentistry, occlusion means the contact of teeth in opposing dental
arches when the jaws are closed (static occlusal relationships) and during various jaw movements (dynamic occlusal relationships). The size of the jaws and arrangement of the teeth within the jaws are subject to a wide
range of variation in humans. The locations of contacts
between opposing teeth (occlusal contacts) vary as a result of differences in the size and shape of the teeth and
jaws and the relative position of the jaws. A wide vari-

C H A PT E R 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

ety of occlusal schemes can be found in healthy individuals. Consequently, definition of an ideal occlusal
scheme is fraught with difficulties.' Despite repeated attempts to describe an ideal occlusal scheme, descriptions are so restrictive that few individuals can be found
to fit the criteria. Failing to find a single adequate definition of an ideal occlusal scheme, Carlsson et al concluded that "in the final analysis, optimal function and
the absence of disease is the principal characteristic of a
good occlusion."' The dental relationships described in
this section conform to the concepts of normal or usual
occlusal schemes and include common variations of
tooth and jaw relationships. Fortunately, the masticatory system is highly adaptable and can function successfully over a wide range of differences in jaw size
and tooth alignment. However, despite this great adaptability, many patients are highly sensitive to abrupt
changes in tooth contacts, often brought about by
restorative dental procedures. Some patients complain
and seek correction of even very minor vertical discrepancies in occlusal contacts. Thus an operative dentist
must understand the precise details of occlusion.
Occlusal contact patterns vary with the position of the
mandible. Static occlusion is further defined by use of
reference positions that include fully closed, terminal
hinge closure, retruded, and right and left lateral extremes. The number and location of occlusal contacts
between opposing teeth have important effects on the
amount and direction of force applied during mastication and other mandibular clenching (bruxing) activities.
In extreme cases, the forces can cause damage to the
teeth or their supporting tissues. Forceful tooth contact
occurs routinely very near the limits or borders of
mandibular movement, thus showing the relevance of
these reference positions.
As stated previously, tooth contact during mandibular movement is termed the dynamic occlusal relationship.
Gliding or sliding contacts occur during mastication
and other mandibular movements. Gliding contacts
may be advantageous or disadvantageous depending
on the teeth involved and the position of the contacts.

The design of the restored tooth surface can have important effects on the number and location of occlusal contacts and
must take into consideration both static and dynamic relationships. The following sections discuss common
arrangements of the teeth and masticatory system and
the more common variations. Mastication and the contacting relationships of anterior and posterior teeth are
described with reference to the potential restorative
needs of the teeth.

GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Tooth Alignment and Dental Arches. In Fig. 2-47, A,
cusps are drawn as blunt, rounded, or pointed projections of the crowns of the teeth. The posterior teeth have
one, two, or three cusps near the facial and lingual sur-

faces of each tooth. Cusps are separated by distinct developmental grooves and sometimes have additional supplemental grooves on the cusp inclines. The facial cusps
are separated from the lingual cusps by a deep groove
termed the central groove. If a tooth has multiple facial
cusps or multiple lingual cusps, the cusps are separated
by facial or lingual developmental grooves, respectively.
Depressions between the cusps are termed fossae (the
singular form is fossa). Grooves having noncoalesced
enamel are fissures; noncoalesced enamel in a fossa is a
pit. Cusps in both jaws are aligned in a roughly parabolic curve. Usually the maxillary arch is larger than the
mandibular arch, resulting in the maxillary cusps overlapping the mandibular cusps when the arches are in
maximal occlusal contact (Fig. 2-47, B). In Fig. 2-47, A,
two curved lines are drawn over the teeth to aid in the
visualization of the arch form. These curved lines identify the alignment of similarly functioning cusps or fossae. On the left side of the arches, an imaginary arc connecting the row of facial cusps in the mandibular arch is
drawn and labeled the facial occlusal line. Above that, an
imaginary line connecting the maxillary central fossae is
labeled the central fossa occlusal line. The mandibular facial occlusal line and the maxillary central fossa occlusal
line coincide exactly when the mandibular arch is fully
closed into the maxillary arch. On the right side of the
dental arches, the maxillary lingual occlusal line and
mandibular central fossa occlusal line are drawn and labeled. These lines also coincide when the mandible is
fully closed.
In Fig. 2-47, B, the dental arches are fully interdigitated. Note again that the maxillary dental arch is larger
than the mandibular arch, so the maxillary teeth overlap
the mandibular teeth. The overlap of the maxillary
cusps can be observed directly when the jaws are
closed. Maximum intercuspation (MI) is the position of
the mandible when the teeth are brought into full interdigitation with the maximal number of teeth contacting.
Synonyms for MI include intercuspal contact, acquired occlusion, habitual occlusion, and convenience occlusion.
In Fig. 2-47, C (a proximal view), the mandibular facial occlusal line and the maxillary central fossa occlusal
line coincide exactly. The maxillary lingual occlusal line
and the mandibular central fossa occlusal line identified
in Fig. 2-47, A, also are coincident. Cusps that contact the
opposing teeth along the central fossa occlusal line are
termed supporting cusps (centric, holding, or stamp cusps);
the cusps that overlap the opposing teeth are termed
nonsupporting cusps (noncentric or nonholding cusps). For
example, the mandibular facial occlusal line identifies
the mandibular supporting cusps, whereas the maxillary facial cusps are nonsupporting cusps. These terms
are usually applied only to posterior teeth to distinguish
the difference in function between the two rows of
cusps. In some circumstances the functional role of the
cusps can be reversed, as illustrated in Fig. 2-48, C-2.

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

The posterior teeth are well suited to crushing food because of the mutual cusp-fossa contacts (see Fig. 2-49, D).
In Fig. 2-47, D, the anterior teeth are seen to have a
different relationship in MI, but they also show the characteristic maxillary overlap. The incisor teeth are best
suited to shearing food because of their overlap and the
sliding contact on the lingual surface of the maxillary
teeth. In MI, the mandibular incisors and canines contact the respective lingual surfaces of their maxillary opponents. The amount of horizontal (overjet) and vertical
(overbite) overlap (see Fig. 2-48, A-2) can significantly influence mandibular movement and thus influence the cusp
design of restorations of posterior teeth (discussed subsequently). Variations in growth (development) of the
jaws and position of the anterior teeth result in openbite, where vertical or horizontal discrepancies prevent
the teeth from contacting (see Fig. 2-48, inset A-3).
Anterior-Posterior Interarch Relationships. In Fig.
2-47, E, the cusp interdigitation pattern of the first molar teeth is used to classify anterior-posterior arch relationships using a system developed by Edward Angle.'
During eruption of the teeth, the tooth cusps and fossae
guide the teeth into maximal contact. Three interdigitated relationships of the first molars are commonly observed. (See Fig. 2-47, F, for an illustration of the occlusal
contacts that result from different molar positions.) The
location of the mesiofacial cusp of the maxillary first molar in
relation to the mandibular first molar is used as an indicator
in Angle's classification. The most common molar relationship finds the maxillary mesiofacial cusp located in
the mesiofacial developmental groove of the mandibular first molar. This relationship is termed Angle Class I.
Slight posterior positioning of the mandibular first
molar results in the mesiofacial cusp of the maxillary
molar settling into the facial embrasure between the
mandibular first molar and the mandibular second
premolar. This is termed Class II and occurs in approximately 20% of the U.S. population. Anterior positioning
of the mandibular first molar relative to the maxillary
first molar is termed Class III and is least common. In
Class III relationships, the mesiofacial cusp of the maxillary first molar fits into the distofacial groove of the
mandibular first molar. This occurs in 3% of the U.S.
population. Significant differences in these percentages
occur in other countries and in different racial and ethnic groups.
Although Angle classification is based on the relationship of the cusps, Fig. 2-47, G, illustrates that the location of the tooth roots in the alveolar bone determines
the relative positions of the crowns and cusps. When the
mandible is proportionally similar in size to the maxilla,
a Class I molar relationship is formed; when the
mandible is proportionally smaller than the maxilla, a
Class II relationship is formed; and when the mandible
is relatively greater than the maxilla, a Class III relationship is formed.

I nterarch Tooth Relationships. Fig. 2-48 illustrates
the occlusal contact relationships of individual teeth in
more detail. In Fig. 2-48, A-2, incisor overlap is illustrated.
The overlap is characterized in two dimensions, horizontal overlap (overjet) and vertical overlap (overbite). Differences in the size of the mandible and maxilla can result
in clinically significant variations in incisor relationships, including: (1) openbite as a result of mandibular
deficiency, (2) excessive eruption of the posterior teeth,
or (3) mandibular growth excess (see Fig. 2-48, A-3).
These variations have significant clinical effects on the
contacting relationships of posterior teeth during various jaw movements, because the anterior teeth do
not provide gliding contact. (See Fig. 2-58, E through G,
for more details on the effects of the lack of anterior
guidance.)
Fig. 2-48, B-1, illustrates a normal Class I occlusion in
which each mandibular premolar is located one half of
a tooth width anterior to its maxillary antagonist. This
relationship results in the mandibular facial cusp contacting the maxillary premolar mesial marginal ridge
and the maxillary premolar lingual cusp contacting the
mandibular distal marginal ridge. Because only one antagonist is contacted, this is termed a tooth-to-tooth relationship. The most stable relationship results from the
contact of the supporting cusp tips against the two marginal ridges, termed a tooth-to-two-tooth contact. Variations in the mesial-distal root position of the teeth will
produce different relationships (see Fig. 2-48, B-2).
When the mandible is slightly distal to the maxilla
(termed a Class II tendency), each supporting cusp tip
will occlude in a stable relationship with the opposing
mesial or distal fossa; this relationship is a cusp fossa
contact.
Fig. 2-48, C, illustrates Class I molar relationships in
more detail. Fig. 2-48, C-1, shows how cutting away the
facial half of the maxillary molar reveals the mandibular facial cusp tips contacting the maxillary marginal
ridges and the central fossa triangular ridges. A faciolingual longitudinal section reveals how the supporting
cusps contact the opposing fossae and also shows the
effect of the developmental grooves on reducing the
height of the nonsupporting cusps opposite the supporting cusp tips. During lateral movements the supporting cusp can move through the facial and lingual
developmental groove spaces. Faciolingual position
variations are possible in molar relationships because of
differences in growth of the width of the maxilla or the
mandible. Fig. 2-48, C-2, illustrates normal molar contact position, facial crossbite, and lingual crossbite relationships. Facial crossbite in the posterior teeth is characterized by contact of the maxillary facial cusps in the
opposing mandibular central fossae and the mandibular lingual cusps in the opposing maxillary central fossae. Facial crossbite (also termed buccal crossbite) results in
reversal of the role of the cusps of the involved teeth. In

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

FIG. 2-48 Tooth relationships.

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

this reversal example, the mandibular lingual cusps and
maxillary facial cusps become supporting cusps, and
the maxillary lingual cusps and mandibular facial cusps
become nonsupporting cusps. Lingual crossbite results
in a very poor molar relationship that provides little
functional contact.
Posterior Cusp Characteristics. Four cusp ridges can
be identified as common features of all cusps. The outer
incline of a cusp faces either the facial (or the lingual)
surface of the tooth and is named for its respective surface. In the example using a mandibular second premolar (Fig. 2-49, A), the facial cusp ridge of the facial cusp is
indicated by the line that points to the outer incline of
the cusp. The inner inclines of posterior cusps face the
central fossa or the central groove of the tooth. The inner incline cusp ridges are widest at the base and become narrower as they approach the cusp tip. For this
reason, they are termed triangular ridges. The triangular
ridge of the facial cusp of the mandibular premolar is indicated by the arrow to the inner incline. Triangular
ridges are usually set off from the other cusp ridges by
one or more supplemental groves. In Fig. 2-49, B(1) and
C(1), the outer inclines of the facial cusps of the
mandibular and maxillary first molars are highlighted.
In Fig. 2-49, B(2) and C(2), the triangular ridges of the facial and lingual cusps are highlighted.
The mesial and distal cusp ridges extend from the cusp
tip mesially and distally and are named for their direction. The mesial and distal cusp ridges extend downward from the cusp tips, forming the characteristic facial and lingual profiles of the cusps as viewed from the
facial or lingual aspect. At the base of the cusp, the
mesial or distal cusp ridge either abuts to another cusp
ridge, forming a developmental groove/fissure, or the
cusp ridge turns toward the center line of the tooth and
fuses with the marginal ridge. Marginal ridges are elevated rounded ridges located on the mesial and distal
edges of the tooth's occlusal surface (see Fig. 2-49, A).
The occlusal table of posterior teeth is the area contained
within the mesial and distal cusp ridges and marginal
ridges of the tooth. The occlusal table limits are indicated in the drawings by a circumferential line connecting the highest point of curvature of these cusp ridges
and marginal ridges.
Some cusps are modified to produce the characteristic
form of individual posterior teeth. Mandibular first molars have longer triangular ridges on the distofacial
cusps, causing a deviation of the central groove/fissure
(see Fig. 2-49, B(2]). The mesiolingual cusp of a maxillary molar is much larger than the mesiofacial cusp. The
distal cusp ridge of the maxillary first molar mesiolingual cusp curves facially to fuse with the triangular
ridge of the distofacial cusp (see Fig. 2-49, C[2]). This
junction forms the oblique ridge, which is characteristic of
the maxillary molars. The transverse groove crosses the
oblique ridge where the distal cusp ridge of the mesio-

lingual cusp meets the triangular ridge of the distofacial cusp. Textbooks on dental anatomy should be consulted for more detailed discussions of individual cusp
variations.
Supporting Cusps. In Fig. 2-50, the lingual occlusal
line of the maxillary teeth and the facial occlusal line of
the mandibular teeth mark the locations of the supporting cusps (also termed stamp cusps, centric holding cusps,
and holding cusps). These cusps contact the opposing
teeth in their corresponding faciolingual center on a
marginal ridge or a fossa. Supporting cusp-central fossa
contact has been compared to a mortar and pestle because the supporting cusp cuts, crushes, and grinds fibrous food against the ridges forming the concavity of
the fossa (see Fig. 2-49, D). Natural tooth form has multiple ridges and grooves ideally suited to aid in the reduction of the food bolus during chewing. During
chewing, the highest forces and longest duration of contact occur at MI. Supporting cusps also serve to prevent
drifting and passive eruption of the teeth; hence the
term holding cusp.
Supporting cusps (see Fig. 2-50) can be identified by
five characteristic features 9 :
They contact the opposing tooth in MI.
They support the vertical dimension of the face.
They are nearer the faciolingual center of the tooth
than nonsupporting cusps.
Their outer incline has the potential for contact.
They have broader, more rounded cusp ridges than
nonsupporting cusps.
Because the maxillary arch is larger than the
mandibular arch, the supporting cusps are located on
the maxillary lingual occlusal line (see Fig. 2-50, D),
whereas the mandibular supporting cusps are located
on the mandibular facial occlusal line (see Fig. 2-50, A
and B). The supporting cusps of both arches are more
robust and better suited to crushing food than the nonsupporting cusps. The lingual tilt of the posterior teeth
increases the relative height of the supporting cusps
with respect to the nonsupporting cusps (see Fig. 2-50,
C), and the central fossa contacts of the supporting
cusps are obscured by overlapping nonsupporting
cusps (see Fig. 2-50, E and F). Removal of the nonsupporting cusps allows the supporting cusp-central fossa
contacts to be studied (see Fig. 2-50, G and H). During

fabrication of restorations it is important that supporting
cusps are not contacting the opposing teeth in a manner that
results in lateral deflection of teeth. Rather, the restoration
should provide contacts on plateaus or smoothly concave fossae so that masticatory forces are directed approximately parallel to the long axes of the teeth.
Nonsupporting Cusps. Fig. 2-51 illustrates that nonsupporting cusps form a lingual occlusal line in the
mandibular arch (see Fig. 2-51, D) and a facial occlusal
line in the maxillary arch (see Fig. 2-51, B). Nonsupporting cusps (also termed noncentric cusps or nonholding

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

Cusp ridge names:
1. Outer i nclines are named for their surface.
2. I nner inclines are triangular ridges named
for cusp.
3. Cusp ridges are named for their direction.

Pattern of cusps and grooves are
similar to mortar and pestle for
crushing food.

Mesial and distal triangular fossae
define marginal ridges and sharpen
occlusal contacts.

Supplemental grooves widen
pathways for opposing cusp
movement.

FIG

2-49 Common features of all posterior teeth.

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

Synonyms for
supporting
cusps include:
1. Centric cusps
2. Holding cusps
3. Stamp cusps

A Mandibular arch

B Mandibular right quadrant

Facial
occlusal line

Mandibular supporting cusps are located
on the facial occlusal line.

The mandibular arch is smaller than
the maxillary arch so the supporting
cusps are located on the facial occlusal
li ne. The mandibular lingual cusps that
overlap the maxillary teeth are
nonsupporting cusps.
C

D Maxillary right quadrant

Proximal view of molar
teeth in oclusion

Mandibular
supporting
cusp in
opposing
maxillary
fossa

Maxillary
supporting cusp
i n opposing
mandibular
fossa

E Lingual view of left dental arches in
occlusion

G

Mandibular nonsupporting cusps
removed

Maxillary supporting cusps occluding in
opposing fossae and on marginal ridges

Supporting cusps are located on the
li ngual occlusal line in maxillary arch.

F Facial view of left dental arches in
occlusion

H Maxillary nonsupporting cusps removed

Mandibular supporting cusps occluding in
opposing fossae and on marginal ridges
FIG. 2-50

Supporting cusps.

Supporting cusp features:
1. Contact opposing tooth in MI
2. Support vertical dimension
3. Nearer faciolingual center of
tooth than nonsupporting
cusps
4. Outer incline has potential for
contact
5. More rounded than
nonsupporting cusps

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

cusps) overlap the opposing tooth without contacting
the tooth. Nonsupporting cusps are located in the
anterior-posterior plane in facial (lingual) embrasures or
in the developmental groove of the opposing teeth, creating an alternating arrangement when the teeth are in
maximum intercuspation (see Fig. 2-51, E and F). Maxillary premolar nonsupporting cusps also play an essential role in esthetics. When viewed from the occlusal, the
nonsupporting cusps are farther from the faciolingual
center of the tooth than supporting cusps. Nonsupporting cusps have sharper cusp ridges that apparently
serve to shear food as they pass close to the supporting
cusp ridges during chewing strokes. The overlap of the
cusps helps keep the soft tissue of the tongue and
cheeks out from the occlusal tables, preventing selfinjury during chewing.
MECHANICS OF MANDIBULAR MOTION
Mandible and Temporomandibular Joints. The
mandible articulates with a special depression in each
temporal bone called the glenoid fossa. The joints are
termed the temporomandibular joints because they are
named for the two bones forming the articulation. The
TMJs allow the mandible to move in all three planes
(Fig. 2-52, A). A TMJ is similar to a ball-and-socket joint,
but it differs from a true mechanical ball-and-socket in
some important features. The ball part, the mandibular
condyle (see Fig. 2-52, B), is smaller than the socket, or
glenoid fossa. The space resulting from the size difference is filled by a tough, pliable, and movable stabilizer
termed the articular disk. The disk separates the TMJ into
two articulating surfaces lubricated by synovial fluid in
the superior and inferior joint spaces. Rotational opening of the mandible occurs as the condyles rotate under
the disks (see Fig. 2-52, C). Thus rotational movement occurs between the inferior surface of the disks and the
condyle. During wide opening or protrusion of the
mandible, the condyles move anteriorly in addition to
the rotational opening (see Fig. 2-52, D and E). The disks
move anteriorly with the condyles during opening and
produce sliding movement in the superior joint space between the superior surface of the disks and the articular
eminences (see Fig. 2-52, B). The TMJs allow free movement of the condyles in the anterior-posterior direction
but resist lateral displacement. The disks are firmly attached to the medial and lateral poles of the condyles in
normal, healthy TMJs (see Fig. 2-53, B). The diskcondyle arrangement of the TMJ thus allows both sliding and rotational movement in the same joint.
Because the mandible is a rigid, U-shaped bone with
joints on both ends, movement of one joint will produce
reciprocal movement in the other joint. The diskcondyle complex is free to move anterior-posteriorly,
providing sliding movement between the disk and the
glenoid fossa. One condyle may move anteriorly while
the other remains in the fossa. Anterior movement of

only one condyle produces reciprocal lateral rotation in
the opposite TMJ.
A TMJ cannot be expected to behave like a rigid joint
as seen on articulators ( mechanical devices used by dentists to simulate jaw movement and reference positions).
Because soft tissues cover the two articulating bones
and there is an intervening disk composed of soft tissue,
some resilience is to be expected in the TMJs. In addition to resilience, some "play" or looseness can also be
demonstrated in normal, healthy TMJs, allowing small
posterior and lateral movements of the condyles. In
healthy TMJs the movements are restricted to slightly
less than 1 mm laterally and a few tenths of a millimeter posteriorly. This resilience and looseness can interfere with precise TMJ positioning, even in healthy joints;
this is especially troublesome in diseased joints. TMJ
looseness has made obsolete the concept of precise positioning of the condyle in the fossa. For this reason, the
descriptive terms in this text are preferred.
When morphologic changes occur in the hard and
soft tissues of a TMJ because of disease, the diskcondyle relationship is possibly altered in a number of
ways, including deformation, loosening, perforation or
tearing of the disk, and remodeling of the soft tissue articular surface coverings or their bony support. Diseased TMJs have unusual disk-condyle relationships,
different geometry, and altered jaw movements and reference positions. Textbooks on TMJ disorders and occlusion should be consulted for information concerning
evaluation of diseased joints. The remainder of this description of the movement and position of the mandible
is based on normal, healthy TMJs and does not apply to
diseased joints.
Mandibular Movement. Within certain limits, the
mandible is free to move in three planes, providing six
degrees of freedom of movement. This freedom of motion is greatest at the teeth and occurs to a lesser degree
in the condyles. To describe mandibular motion, its direction and length must be specified in three mutually
perpendicular planes. By convention these planes are
sagittal, coronal (frontal), and transverse (horizontal)
(see Fig. 2-52, A). The midsagittal plane is a vertical (longitudinal) plane that passes through the center of the
head in an anterior-posterior direction. A vertical plane
off the center line, such as a section through the TMJ, is
termed a parasagittal plane. The coronal plane is a vertical
plane perpendicular to the sagittal plane. The transverse
plane is a horizontal plane that passes from anterior to
posterior and is perpendicular to both the sagittal and
frontal planes. Mandibular motion will be described in
each of these planes.
Types of Motion. Centric relation (CR) is the position
of the mandible when the condyles are positioned superiorly in the fossae in healthy TMJs. In this position the
condyles articulate with the thinnest avascular portion
of the disks and are in an anterior-superior position

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

B Maxillary left quadrant

A Maxillary arch

Synonyms for
nonsupporting
cusps include:
1. Noncentric cusps
2. Nonholding cusps

Facial
occlusal line

Maxillary nonsupporting cusps are
l ocated on the facial occlusal line.

The maxillary arch is larger than the
mandibular arch causing the maxillary
facial line (nonsupporting cusps) to
overlap the mandibular teeth.
C

D Mandibular left quadrant

Molar teeth in occlusion

Mandibular nonsupporting cusps
are located on the lingual occlusal line.

Lingual
occlusal line

Maxillary
nonsupporting
cusp overlapping
mandibular tooth
Mandibular
nonsupporting
cusp overlapping
maxillary tooth

Nonsupporting cusp features:
1. Do not contact opposing tooth
i n MI
2. Keep soft tissue of tongue or
cheek off occlusal table
3. Farther from faciolingual center
of tooth than supporting cusps
4. Outer incline has no potential
for contact
5. Have sharper cusp ridges than
supporting cusps

F Views of left dental arches in occlusion
showing facial and lingual occlusal lines

E Views of left dental arches in occlusion
showing interdigitation of nonsupporting cusps

Nonsupporting cusp location:
1. Opposing embrasure
2. Opposing developmental groove

FIG

2-51

Nonsupporting cusps.

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

Mandibular opening:

Hinge opening produces about 25 mm
of separation of the anterior teeth.

The mandible can protrude
approximately 10 mm.

Maximum opening is
approximately 50 mm.

Lateral movement is
approximately 10 mm.
FIG 2-52 Types and directions of motion of the mandible.

Hinge
opening

C H A PT E R 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

against the shapes of the articular eminences. This position is independent of tooth contacts. It has also been
described as the most retruded position of the mandible
from which lateral movements can be made, and the
condyles are in the most posterior, unstrained position
in the glenoid fossa.
Rotation is a simple motion of an object around an axis
(see Fig. 2-52, C). The mandible is capable of rotation
about an axis through centers located in the condyles.
The attachments of the disks to the poles of the condyles
permit the condyles to rotate under the disks. Rotation
with the condyles positioned in CR is termed terminal
hinge (TH) movement. TH is used in dentistry as a reference movement for construction of restorations and
dentures. Initial contact between teeth during a TH closure provides a reference point, termed centric occlusion
(CO). Many patients have a small slide from CO to MI,
typically in a forward and superior direction. Maximum
rotational opening in TH is limited to approximately 25
mm measured between the incisal edges of the anterior
teeth.
Translation is the bodily movement of an object from
one place to another (see Fig. 2-52, D). The mandible is
capable of translation by anterior movement of the diskcondyle complex from the closed position over the
articular eminence and back. Simultaneous, direct anterior movement of both condyles, or mandibular forward thrusting, is termed protrusion. The pathway followed by the anterior teeth during protrusion may not
be smooth or straight because of contact between the
anterior teeth and, sometimes, the posterior teeth. (See
the superior border of Posselt's diagram in Fig. 2-53, A.)
Protrusion is limited to approximately 10 mm by the ligamentous attachments of the masticatory muscles and
the TMJs.
Fig. 2-52, E, illustrates complex motion, which combines rotation and translation in a single movement.
Most mandibular movement during speech, chewing,
and swallowing consists of both rotation and translation. The combination of rotation and translation allows
the mandible to open 50 mm or more.
Fig. 2-52, F, illustrates lateral movement of the
mandible. Left lateral movement of the mandible is illustrated. It is the result of forward translation of the
right condyle and rotation of the left condyle. Right lateral movement of the mandible is the result of forward
translation of the left condyle and rotation of the right
condyle.
CAPACITY OF MOTION OF THE MANDIBLE
In 1952, Ulf Posselt described the capacity of motion of
the mandible.' 9 Using a system of clutches and flags, he
was able to record the mandible's motion. The resultant
diagram has been termed Posselt's diagram (Fig. 2-53, A).
By necessity, the original recordings of mandibular
movement were done outside of the mouth, which mag-

nified the vertical dimension but not the horizontal dimension. Modern systems using digital computer techniques can record mandibular motion in actual time and
dimensions and then compute and draw the motion as
it occurred at any point in the mandible and teeth.' This
makes it possible to accurately reconstruct mandibular
motion simultaneously at several points. Three of these
points are particularly significant clinically- the incisor
point, molar point, and condyle point (see Fig. 2-54, A, i,
m, c).6 The incisor point is located on the midline of the
mandible at the junction of the facial surface of the mandibular central incisors and the incisal edge. The molar
point is the tip of the mesiofacial cusp of the mandibular
first molar on a specified side. The condyle point is the
center of rotation of the mandibular condyle on the
specified side.
Limits of Mandibular Motion: the Borders. In Fig.
2-53, A, the limits for movement of the incisor point are
illustrated in the sagittal plane. The mandible is not
drawn to scale with the drawing of the sagittal borders.
Also, in this particular diagram, CO equals MI. (As
mentioned, in some patients there may be a small slide
from CO to MI.) The starting point for this diagram is
CO, the first contact of teeth when the condyles are in
CR. The posterior border of the diagram from CO to a in
Fig. 2-53, A, is formed by rotation of the mandible
around the condyle points. This border from CO to a is
TH movement. Hinge axis is the term used to describe an
imaginary line connecting the centers of rotation in the
condyles (condyle points) and is useful for reference to
articulators. Hinge-axis closure is a reference movement
used in prosthetic dentistry and is only valid when the
disks are properly positioned in the fossae. The inferior
limit to this hinge opening occurs at approximately 25
mm and is indicated by a in Fig. 2-53, A. The superior
li mit of the posterior border occurs at the first tooth contact and is identified by CO. In most healthy adults, a slid-

ing tooth contact movement positions the mandible slightly
anteriorly from CO into MI (see Fig. 2-54, B).
Terminal hinge, centric relation, and centric occlusion are
terms surrounded by controversy and unresolved issues.' Controversies include the following questions: Is
CR a strained or unstrained position? Should the
mandible be guided into this position by the dentist? If
so, how should the mandible be grasped, shoved, or
supported into position? Should only the patient's muscles be used to guide the mandible into position?
Should mechanical devices such as jigs, tongue blades,
or plastic shims be used to guide the mandible into position? How is CR defined in disease states such as degenerative joint disease, arthritic remodeling, or disk
displacement? It is important to remember that CR is a po-

sition determined by the condyles superiorly positioned in the
glenoid fossae, independent of tooth contact. TH is rotation
when the condyles are in CR. CO is the first tooth contact as
the mandible closes in TH.

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

Left TMJ, sagittal section
c = 10 mm, limit of protrusion

10-12 mm

5-6 mm

-a = 25 mm, limit
of rotational opening

Limits of condyle motion:
10-12 mm anterior to MI
0.2 mm posterior to MI
5-6 mm vertical displacement
due to curvature of eminence

A Sagittal view
Determination of sagittal borders:
Superior - tooth contact
Posterior - joint ligaments
I nferior - muscle lengthening
Anterior - joint ligaments

Superior border
determined by tooth
contact (canine guidance).

Medial
pole

Normal TMJ looseness
allows up to 1.5 mm of
l ateral shifting (Bennett shift).

c l = 10 mm right
l ateral jaw movement

B Frontal view

e = 10 mm left
l ateral jaw movement

Left TMJ, horizontal view
b
0.75 mm
Left

10 mm

Borders are arcs of circles
based on rotation of the
condyles in retruded and
protruded positions.

Condyle motion:
0.75 mm left/right
10-12 mm
anterior/posterior
c

FIG . 2-53 Capacity of motion of the mandible. (Mandible drawings are not to scale with border

diagrams.)

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

At point a in Fig. 2-53, A, further rotation of the
condyles is impossible due to the limits of stretch of the
j oint capsule, ligamentous attachments to the condyles,
and the mandible-opening muscles. The limit of pure
rotational opening is very close to 25 mm in adults. Further opening can be achieved only by translation of the
condyles anteriorly, producing the line a-b. Maximum
opening (point b) in adults is approximately 50 mm.
These measures are important diagnostically. For example, mandibular opening limited to 25 mm suggests
blockage of condylar translation, usually the result of
disk disorders. Limitation of opening in the 35 to 45 mm
range is suggestive of muscular limitation. Changes in
mandibular opening are useful measures of the course of disorders involving the TMJs and the muscles of mastication.
The line CO-a-b represents the maximum retruded
opening path. This is the posterior border, or the posterior
limit of mandibular opening. The line b-c represents the
maximum protruded closure. This is achieved by a forward thrust of the mandible that keeps the condyles in
their maximum anterior positions while arcing the
mandible closed.
Retrusion, or posterior movement of the mandible, results in the irregular line c-CO. The irregularities of the
superior border are due to tooth contacts; thus the superior border is a tooth-determined border. Protrusion is a
reference mandibular movement starting from CO and
proceeding anteriorly to point c. Protrusive mandibular
movements are used by dentists to evaluate occlusal relationships of the teeth and restorations. The complete
diagram, CO-a-b-c-CO, represents the maximum possible motion of the incisor point in all directions in the
sagittal plane. The area of most interest to dentists is the superior border produced by tooth contact. (Mandibular
movement in the sagittal plane is illustrated in more detail in Fig. 2-54.)
The motion of the condyle point during chewing is
strikingly different from the motion of the incisor point.
Motion of the condyle point is a curved line that follows the
articular eminence. The maximum protrusion of the
condyle point is 10 to 12 mm anteriorly when following
the downward curve of the articular eminence. The
condyle point does not drop away from the eminence during
mandibular movements. Thus chewing movements in the
sagittal plane are characterized by a nearly vertical upand-down motion of the incisor point, whereas the
condyle points move anteriorly and then return posteriorly over a curved surface (see Fig. 2-54, B).
In the frontal view shown in Fig. 2-53, B, the incisor
point and chin are capable of moving about 10 mm to
the left or right. This lateral movement (sometimes
termed an excursion) is indicated by the lines MI-d to the
right and MI-e to the left. Points d and e indicate the
li mit of lateral motion of the incisor point. Lateral movement is often described with respect to only one side of
the mandible for the purpose of defining the relative

motion of the mandibular to the maxillary teeth. For example, in a left lateral movement, the left mandibular
teeth move away from the midline and the right
mandibular teeth move toward the midline. Mandibular pathways directed away from the midline are
termed working (synonyms include laterotrusion and
function), and mandibular pathways directed toward
the midline are termed nonworking (synonyms include
mediotrusion, nonfunction, and balancing). The terms
working and nonworking are based on observations of
chewing movements where the mandible is seen to shift
during closure toward the side of the mouth containing
the food bolus. Thus the working side is used to crush
food while the nonworking side is without a food bolus.
The left lateral mandibular motion indicated by the
line MI-e (see Fig. 2-53, B) is the result of rotation of the
left condyle (working-side condyle) and translation of
the right condyle (nonworking-side condyle) to its anterior limit (see Fig. 2-52, F). The translation of the nonworking condyle in a right lateral motion of the
mandible can be seen in the horizontal view in Fig. 2-55,
A and B. The line e-b in Fig. 2-53, B, is completed by
mandibular opening that is the result of rotation of both
condyles and translation of the working condyle to its
maximum anterior position. Line b-d-MI represents similar motions on the right side.
The vertical displacement in the incisor point line
from MI to e or d, shown in Fig. 2-53, B, is the result of
the teeth, usually the canines, gliding over each other.
Vertical displacement of the mandible due to gliding
contact of the canine teeth is termed canine guidance and
has significance for restorative procedures. The gliding
tooth contact supplied by canine guidance provides some of
the vertical separation of the posterior teeth during lateral jaw
movements and prevents potentially damaging collisions of
their cusps. When the canine guidance is shallow, the occlusal surface of the posterior teeth must be altered to
prevent potentially damaging contacts in lateral movements. An articulator aids in evaluation of the posterior
tooth relationships during construction of posterior
restorations.
There is some laxity in the TMJs; consequently the
condyles can move slightly to the working side during
the closing stroke. This lateral shift of the condyle
points, illustrated in the frontal view of a right TMJ in
Fig. 2-53, B, is termed Bennett shift or lateral shift. This
shift is variable from patient to patient and is a measure of the looseness of the TMJs (Fig. 2-55, B through
D). The magnitude of the shift in normal TMJs varies
from 0 to 1.5 mm and normally has little effect on the
posterior teeth. Excessive lateral shift is associated
with morphologic changes of the TMJs. However, excessive lateral condylar shifting coupled with shallow
canine guidance poses a significant problem for
restorative procedures because the resulting lateral
mandibular movements are very flat; consequently,

C H A PT E R 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

the dentist. The anterior guidance can be increased by
restorative or orthodontic means to facilitate separation
of the posterior teeth in patients who have shallow horizontal guidance.
Fig. 2-59 (lateral condylar guidance) illustrates how setting the articulator simulates the looseness of the TMJs.
TMJ laxity can be measured and transferred to the articulator by use of dentist-guided bite registration records,
pantographic tracings, or a clutch-and-flag system. Bite
registrations consistently produce lower values for the
lateral shift because tooth contact tends to center the
condyles. 13 A clutch-and-flag system can produce results comparable to a pantographic tracing when used
to set fully adjustable articulators. 12 A series of tracings
of guided movements from different patients is presented in Fig. 2-59, A. All the tracings are parallel after
the first few millimeters of movement. The difference
from one patient to the next is the result of the amount
of lateral shift. Fig. 2-59, B, illustrates simulations of arcs
at different degrees of lateral shift; the similarity of lines
a, b, and c to the lines similarly marked in Fig. 2-59, A,
should be noted. One should also note that none of the
tracings of lateral condylar movement exhibit the "progressive" lateral shift indicated by the dashed line d in
Fig. 2-59, B. Fig. 2-59, C, illustrates the underside of a
condylar housing of an articulator. Shifting the medial
wall simulates TMJ laxity and allows movements similar to those illustrated in Fig. 2-59, A. Fig. 2-59, D, illustrates how movements a, b, and c were made for Fig.
2-59, B, by shifting the medial wall of the condylar box.
Increasing laxity of the TMJ, indicated by increasing
lateral shift, results in significant changes in movement
of the molar point near MI (see Fig. 2-59, E). The working-side movement is least affected because it is already
a directly lateral movement. The nonworking molarpoint movement is changed in both the lateral and horizontal components. The lateral pathway is extended
progressively more laterally in patients with excessive
lateral looseness of the TMJs. The horizontal effect is a
"flattening" of the pathway by reduction of the vertical
separation. These effects are illustrated by tracings of
molar-point movement on an articulator as the amount
of lateral shift is increased from 0 to 3.5 mm. The effect
of increasing looseness is to increase the likelihood of
collisions of the mesiolingual cusps of the maxillary molars with the mandibular distofacial cusps of the molars
on the nonworking side (see Fig. 2-59, E and F). These
types of undesirable contact between the opposing supporting cusps are termed nonworking interferences
TOOTH CONTACTS DURING
MANDIBULAR MOVEMENTS
Operative dentists must design restorations capable of
withstanding the forces of mastication and clenching.
The choice of restorative material and the design of the
restoration are frequently influenced by the need to

withstand forceful contact with the opposing teeth. Thus
evaluation of the location, direction, and area of tooth contacts
during various mandibular movements is an essential part of
the preoperative evaluation of teeth to be restored. The anterior teeth support gliding contacts, whereas the posterior teeth support the heavy forces applied during
chewing and clenching. Fig. 2-60 shows a variety of
tooth contact relationships. In Fig. 2-60, A, a right
mandibular movement is illustrated, showing the separation of the posterior teeth on the left, or nonworking,
side. This separation of the posterior teeth results from
the combined effects of the canine guidance and the
slope of the articular eminence on the nonworking side.
The effect of the canine guidance is illustrated in the incisor point tracing in Fig. 2-60, B. The superior border on
either side of MI is determined by the shape of the lingual surfaces of the maxillary canine teeth. Guiding
contact between the right canines is illustrated in Fig.
2-60, C.
A variety of areas on the posterior teeth may contact
the opposing tooth during mandibular movements. In
Fig. 2-60, D, the opposing surfaces of the molar teeth are
divided into five areas:
1. Inner incline of nonsupporting (noncentric) cusp.
This area sometimes participates in working-side
movements by contacting the outer aspect of the supporting (centric) cusp (area 5).
2. Fossa or marginal ridge contact area. This is the main
holding contact (or centric stop) area for the opposing supporting cusp.
3. Inner incline of the supporting (centric holding)
cusp. This area has the potential for undesirable contact during nonworking movements.
4. Contact area of the supporting (centric holding) cusp.
This is the main cusp contact area.
5. Outer aspect of the supporting (centric holding)
cusp. This area sometimes participates in workingside movements by contacting the inner incline of the
nonsupporting (noncentric) cusp (area 1).
Anterior Tooth Contacts. During anterior movement
of the mandible (i.e., protrusion), the lower anterior
teeth glide along the lingual surfaces of the maxillary
anterior teeth (see Fig. 2-60, E and F). Multiple contacts
between the opposing dental arches on the anterior
teeth are desirable in protrusion movements. With protrusion, multiple contacts serve to prevent excessive
force on any individual pair of gliding teeth. Posterior
tooth contact during protrusion is not desirable because
it may overload the involved teeth. The combination of
the anterior guidance (slope and vertical overlap of the
anterior teeth) and the slope of the articular eminence
(horizontal condylar guidance on the articulator) determines the amount of vertical separation of the posterior
teeth as the mandible moves anteriorly. Some texts refer

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

FIG . 2-54 Mandibular capacity for motion: sagittal view. (B through D from Gibbs CH, Lundeen HC:
Jaw movements and forces during chewing and swallowing and their clinical significance. In Lundeen HC, Gibbs CH, editors: Advances in occlusion, Bristol, 1982, John Wright PSG.)

little separation of the posterior teeth occurs (see Figs.
2-57 through 2-60).
In Fig. 2-53, C, the horizontal view illustrates the capability of the mandible to translate anteriorly. Extreme
left lateral motion is indicated by MI-e produced by rotation of the left condyle (working condyle) and translation of the right condyle (nonworking condyle) to its anterior limit. From point e, protrusion of the left condyle
moves the incisor point to c, the maximum protruded

position. If there is looseness in the TMJs, lateral shift of
the mandible also will be seen in this view. Lateral shifting can be seen in normal chewing movements in Figs.
2-55 and 2-56.
Sagittal View. In Fig. 2-54, the drawing of the
mandible is used to orient the sagittal border diagrams.
Projected below the mandible are diagrams of the incisor point (i) and molar point (m) borders (see Fig. 2-54,
A). The molar point borders are similar to the incisor

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

Lateral movement is produced by
anterior translation of one condyle,
producing rotation about the center
in the opposite condyle.

Nonworking condyle movement:
1. Condylar translation with rotation about the center
of the opposite condyle
2. Solid line indicates the change in the condylar path
due to progressive shifting of the center of rotation in
the opposite condyle
3. Solid line indicates the condylar path resulting from
i mmediate shifting of the center of rotation of the
opposite condyle
4. Observed motion of the condyle during chewing:
note shifting as closing is initiated and the return to
normal position at the end of closure

Effect of shifting at first molar:
1. Little change on working side
2. Wide lateral motion on nonworking side

D

Left lateral movement with shifting

FIG . 2-55 Mandibular capacity for motion: horizontal view. (B from Gibbs CH, Lundeen HC: Jaw
movements and forces during chewing and swallowing and their clinical significance. In Lundeen
HC, Gibbs CH, editors: Advances in occlusion, Bristol, 1982, John Wright PSG.)

CHAPTER

2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

The superior border of the incisor point tracing is
determined by the canine teeth, but the molar point
superior border is influenced by the pathway of the
condyle point. Canine guidance and articular
eminence slope are mechanically coupled to produce
the superior border of the molar point tracing but they
do not contribute equally. The canine is primarily
responsible for the superior border of molar point on
the working pathway (away from the midline). The
nonworking side articular eminence has the dominant
influence on the nonworking pathway (toward the
midline) on the molar point superior border.

Rotating
condyle

I n this right lateral movement, the canine
controls the final closing path on the
working side as indicated by the coincidence
of the closure tracing and the superior border.
Translating
condyle

A

I f the molar cusps are higher than the
border then they will collide during
chewing. This is more likely to occur
on the nonworking side.
TYPICAL CHEW
Right First Molar
Working Movement

Mandibular closure during chewing
approaches MI from a laterally shifted
position.

Chewing movements show frequent
encounters with the superior border in the
i ncisor point tracing suggesting frequent
contact of the canine teeth during closing.
FIG 2-56 Mandibular capacity for motion: frontal view. (B from Gibbs CH, Lundeen HC: Jaw movements and forces during chewing and swallowing and their clinical significance. In Lundeen HC,
Gibbs CH, editors: Advances in occlusion, Bristol, 1982, John Wright PSG.)

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

point diagram but are shorter in the vertical dimension
because the molar point is closer to the TMJ. Closure of
the jaw on the posterior border is termed terminal hinge
closure. TH closure is a simple arc of a circle with a radius equal to the length from the incisor point to the
center of the hinge axis (condyle point c). The area near
MI is enlarged to illustrate the details of the TH closure
(see Fig. 2-54, B). CO and MI are located in very close
proximity. In the magnified view, the teeth can be seen
to guide the mandible from CO to MI. The gliding (sliding) contact typically occurs on the first premolars and
is 1 to 2 mm long. The horizontal component of this
slide is only a few tenths of a millimeter in healthy
joints. However, this has been exaggerated in many
textbooks, and many dentists do not recognize that the
horizontal component of the slide is much smaller than
the observed diagonal slide. Traditionally, the discrepancy between CO and MI has been a source of debate in
dentistry, resulting in extensive literature on the topic. 4
This CO-MI controversy is the result of misinterpretation of the inherent resiliency or looseness of normal,
healthy TMJs. Failure to recognize that some patients
have damaged TMJs can further add to confusion concerning the significance of the CO-MI controversy. Damage to the TMJs as a consequence of arthritic processes or internal derangements increases the looseness of the joints and
changes the relationship of CO to MI.
Chewing movements at the incisor point involve an
almost vertical opening and then a loop slightly to the
posterior on closing, using only a small percentage of
the total area of the sagittal border diagram. During
chewing, the only border contact occurs at MI. The closing strokes never approach TH, indicating that at least
one condyle (on the nonworking side) remains advanced during the closing stroke. The condyle point
moves along the pathway Pc during all movements
other than TH. In contrast to the nearly vertical closing
strokes at incisor point, the sagittal closing strokes at the
molar point involve an anterior component on the
working side and a posterior component on the nonworking side. This difference in molar point movement
is due to the deviation of the jaw to the working side
during closure, illustrated by the difference in motion of
the working- and nonworking-side condyles. The nonworking side closing strokes closely approach the superior border, indicating the potential for undesirable contact on the nonworking side (see Fig. 2-54, C).
View. Fig. 2-55, A, shows a horizontal
Horizontal
view (or occlusal view when referring to the teeth) of
the mandible with superimposed incisor, molar, and
condyle point test movements. Chewing movements
are characterized by wide lateral movement of the
mandible to the working side during closure (see Fig.
2-55, B). When viewed from above, the pathways of the
molar and incisor points are typically in a figure-eight
pattern with an S-shaped lateral opening motion and a

straight medial closing stroke. There are important differences in the directions of closure for the molar point
on the working and nonworking sides. During closure
on the working side (labeled b in Fig. 2-55, B), the
mandibular teeth medially approach the maxillary teeth
from a slightly posterior position and move slightly anteriorly into MI. On the contralateral side (the nonworking side, labeled d in Fig. 2-55, B), the mandibular
molar teeth during closure approach, in a medial-tolateral direction, the maxillary teeth from a slightly anterior position and move slightly posteriorly into MI.
The closing strokes are the same pathways generated by
guided (test) lateral mandibular movements used to
check the occlusion, except the directions traveled are
opposite (see Fig. 2-55, B, inset). On the inset drawing of
the maxillary left teeth in Fig. 2-55, the working, nonworking, and protrusive pathways are marked W, NW,
and P respectively. These are the guided test movements employed by dentists to assess the occlusal function of the teeth.
The horizontal, enlarged view of the mandible showing condyle point movement (working side labeled a;
nonworking side labeled e) during chewing is important because it illustrates the lateral shift of the condyles
during the closing stroke (see Fig. 2-55, B). Opening, in
the typical chewing motion illustrated here, involves
movement of both condyle points on the midsagittal
path, producing the vertical drop in the incisor point
seen in the sagittal view. Lateral opening may be seen in
normal children and adults with worn and flattened
teeth. As closing is initiated, the mandible shifts laterally, moving both condyle points to the working side.
The nonworking condyle movement closely approaches
its medial border during the closing stroke (see Fig.
2-55, C). During final closure, when the teeth are bought
into MI, the condyle points return to their starting positions. Contact and gliding on the inclines of the teeth are
responsible for bringing the mandible into its final, fully
closed position (MI).
Allowance for lateral displacement of the condyles
during lateral jaw movements is built into semiadjustable articulators. In older models, this usually takes
the form of a Bennett angle or progressive lateral shift
adjustment. The progressive lateral shift allows the
condyles to shift gradually during lateral mandibular
movement. As a result of mandibular movement studies, more recent articulator models have replaced the
progressive lateral shift with immediate shift. (For more
details on setting the medial wall of the condylar housing, see Fig. 2-59 and the later section Articulators and
Mandibular Movements.) Shifting of the mandible, as
depicted by the shift in the condyle points, results in a
similar shift at the teeth that cannot be simulated by
progressive shift (see Fig. 2-55, C).
Frontal View. In Fig. 2-56, A, lateral movement of the
mandible on the superior border is controlled by three
elements: the rotating condyle, the translating condyle,

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

and the working-side canine. During chewing closures,
the mandibular teeth approach the maxillary teeth from
a lateral position. Frequent contact with the border occurs in the incisor and molar point tracings, indicating
that lateral tooth gliding is common during chewing.
This gliding contact occurs on the teeth having the highest projecting cusps that form the superior border (usually the canine teeth).
The incisor point tracing is projected below the drawing of the mandible in Fig. 2-56, A. The chewing strokes
show the gliding contact on the border. The incisorpoint superior border is shaped by the lingual surfaces
of the guiding teeth, which most frequently are the maxillary canine teeth. In Fig. 2-56, B, the lateral side of the
molar-point superior border is shaped by the workingside tooth guidance, which is usually the maxillary canine. The medial side of the molar-point superior border is predominately formed by the nonworking
condyle moving over the articular eminence. The shape
of the superior border at the molar point is the critical
factor for determining the location and height of the
molar cusps during restorative procedures. It is easy to
visualize the effect of changes in cusp height when
viewing the closeup of the molar teeth in the magnified
inset.

ARTICULATORS AND MANDIBULAR
MOVEMENTS
Figs. 2-57 to 2-60 illustrate the scientific basis for the use
of articulators to aid in diagnostic evaluation of occlusion and fabrication of dental restorations. In these figures, the characteristics of chewing movements and
dentist-guided test movements are compared with the
characteristics of movements produced by simple articulators. This can be done by comparing the cusp movement near MI produced by the articulator with the cusp
movement observed in chewing studies or guided
movements. Additionally, the changes in cusp movement near MI because of variation in the adjustment of
articulators are discussed with respect to their effects on
dental restorations.
Fig. 2-57 illustrates the relationship between condylar
movement and articulator settings. Together, the horizontal condylar guidance setting and the medial-wall
setting of an articulator supply sufficient information to
simulate the condyle point movement near MI. The hor-

izontal condylar guidance setting approximates the slope of
the articular eminence; the medial-wall setting approximates
the lateral shift. Collectively these two settings are referred to
as the posterior guidance.
Posterior guidance alone is not sufficient to simulate
mandibular movements near MI because tooth guidance is also involved in forming the superior border.
Full-arch casts mounted in the articulator supply the information concerning anterior guidance from the canine
and the incisor teeth. The mechanical coupling of the

anterior guidance and posterior guidance settings provides sufficient information to simulate movement of
the posterior teeth on the superior border. The articulator

can then be used to diagnose the need to alter the anterior
guidance and to design restorations that avoid cusp collisions
in mandibular movements.
In Fig. 2-58, horizontal condylar guidance is used to describe the shape of the pathway of condyle point movement in the anterior-posterior direction. The condyles
move in contact with the curved surface of the articular
eminence. More recent designs of semiadjustable articulators have adopted curved surfaces to simulate the curvature of the articular eminence. Rotation of the condylar housing downward increases the slope of the
guiding surface of the articulator. The range of adjustment of horizontal condylar inclination is well within
the range of measured movements in human subjects
(see Fig. 2-58, A and B). 14 Although there may be differences in the relative anterior movement of the two
condyles (see Fig. 2-58, C and D), only the first few millimeters of movement have significant effects on the
posterior teeth.
Horizontal condylar guidance and anterior guidance
(supplied by the mounted casts) are mechanically coupled to produce separation of the posterior teeth. The
combined guidance determines the amount of (or lack
of) vertical separation of the posterior teeth as the
mandible leaves or enters MI during protrusion and lateral movements.
Lateral mandibular movements also produce separation of the posterior teeth. Horizontal guidance of the
nonworking condyle coupled with working-side canine
guidance determines the amount of vertical separation
of the posterior teeth on both sides as the mandible
leaves or enters MI during lateral movements (see Fig.
2-56 for details). This information can be used to design
restorations with the proper cusp location and height to
avoid collisions during chewing and other mandibular
movements.
The slope of the articular eminence varies considerably among individuals. The effect of different slopes
can be evaluated by altering the horizontal condylar
guidance on articulators. Increasing the horizontal
condylar guidance increases the steepness of the
mandibular molar movement (molar point) in protrusion. The movement of the maxillary mesiolingual cusp
relative to the mandibular molar is plotted in Fig. 2-58,
The efE through G, for 20-, 30-, and 50-degree slopes.
fect of removing the anterior guidance (a) is also drawn
on the same grid. The loss of anterior guidance has the
greatest effect when the horizontal condylar guidance is
shallow (20 degrees) and has the least effect when the
horizontal condylar guidance is steep (50 degrees). An-

terior guidance has an additive effect on the molar pathway at
all degrees of horizontal guidance. This is an important observation because anterior guidance often can be changed by

CHAPTER2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

The articulator serves to simulate movement of the
mandible. The axis-orbital plane is used as a
reference point for mounting the maxillary cast by
facebow transfer. The mandibular cast is mounted
with respect to the upper arch by use of bite records.
Consult other textbooks for the methods of bite
registration and facebow transfer.
FIG . 2-57 The relationship between condylar motion and articulator settings.

C H A PT E R 2

A

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

Observed pathways

C

Working
condyle point (a) movement

p

Nonworking
condyle point (e) movement

E, F, and G illustrate the combined effect of anterior and posterior
guidance on the superior border of molar point. The angulation of
the posterior guidance is indicated in degrees for each figure. The
absence of anterior guidance is indicated by a and presence of
anterior guidance by b. The tracing of the movement of the
mesiolingual cusp of the maxillary molar is made on the grid in each
figure. Note that the absence of anterior guidance reduces the
separation of the posterior teeth, but has the greatest effect when
the posterior guidance is shallow.

FIG. 2-58 Horizontal condylar guidance. (A modified from Lundeen HC, Wirth CG: Condylar movement patterns engraved in plastic blocks, J Prosthet Dent 30:866-875, 1973, E through G modified
from Lundeen HC, Shryock EF, Gibbs CH: J Prosthet Dent 40:442-452, 1978.)

C H A PT E R 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

Guided border movements:
1. Follow chewing pathway in reverse direction
2. Studies of 160 subjects suggest all are similar
3. Differences are due to amount of side shift
4. Progressive side shift was not observed

Underside of condylar housing
condylar ball movement at extreme
side shift

Maxillary molar; showing
change in nonworking
movement of mandibular
distofacial cusp with
i ncreasing lateral shift

Simulated movements:
1. Are arcs of circles
2. Differ by side shift
3. Are comparable to guided movements

Adjustment of the lateral shift to
produce simulated movements
above

Mandibular molar; showing
change in nonworking
movement of maxillary
mesiolingual cusp with
i ncreasing lateral shift

FIG 2-59 Lateral condylar guidance: the medial wall. (A and B based on data from Lundeen HC,
Wirth CG: J Prosthet Dent 30:866-875, 1973.)

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

FIG . 2-60 Tooth contacts during mandibular movement. (B from Gibbs CH, Lundeen HC: Jaw movements and forces during chewing and swallowing and their clinical significance. In Lundeen HC,
Gibbs CH, editors: Advances in occlusion, Bristol, 1982, John Wright PSG.)

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

to this separation as disocclusion or disclusion of the posterior teeth. Articulator-mounted casts can be used to
assess the superior border near MI, which is the critical
zone for tooth contact. This information is very useful
during the fabrication of ceramic and cast metallic
restorations because the position and height of the restored cusps can be evaluated and adjusted in the laboratory, which minimizes the chairside time and effort required to adjust the completed restorations.
Posterior Tooth Contacts. In idealized occlusal
schemes designed for restorative dentistry, the posterior
teeth should contact only in MI. Any movement of the
mandible should result in separation of the posterior
teeth by the combined effects of anterior guidance and
the slope of the articular eminence (horizontal condylar
guidance on the articulator). Forceful contact or collisions of individual posterior tooth cusps during chewing and clenching may lead to patient discomfort or damage to the teeth. Patients with shallow anterior guidance
or openbite are more difficult to restore without introduction of undesirable tooth contacts. Articulatormounted casts may be used to assess and solve restorative problems that are difficult to achieve by direct
intraoral techniques.
The side of the jaw where the bolus of food is placed
is termed the working side. Working side is also used in
reference to the jaws or teeth when the patient is not
chewing (e.g., in guided test movements directed laterally). The term can also identify a specific side of the
mandible (i.e., the side toward which the mandible is
moving). During chewing the working-side closures
start from a lateral position and are directed medially to
MI. Test movements are used by dentists to assess the
occlusal contacts on the working side; for convenience,
these movements are started in MI and move laterally.
Thus the working-side test movement follows the same
pathway as the working-side chewing closure but occurs in the opposite direction. The preferred occlusal relationship for restorative purposes is to limit the working-side contact to the canine teeth. Tooth contact
posterior to the canine on the working side may occur
naturally in worn dentitions. As the canine teeth are
shortened by wear, separation of the posterior teeth diminishes. Lateral mandibular movements in worn dentitions successively bring into contact more posterior
teeth as the height of the canines decreases. Multiple
tooth contacts during lateral jaw movement are termed
group function. Right-sided group function is illustrated
in Fig. 2-60, E, compared with left canine guidance contact in Fig. 2-60, F. Because the amount of torque and
wear imposed on teeth increases closer to the muscle attachments on the mandible, molar contact in group
function is undesirable. Group function occurs naturally in a worn dentition; however, group function can
be a therapeutic goal when the bony support of the canine teeth is compromised by periodontal disease or

when Class II occlusions where canine guidance is
impossible.
The nonworking side is opposite the working side and
normally does not contain a food bolus during chewing.
During chewing closures, the mandibular teeth on the
nonworking side close from a medial and anterior position and approach MI by moving laterally and posteriorly. Test movements on the nonworking side are made
from MI in a medial and anterior direction. Thus the test
movements and the chewing strokes are made in opposite directions along the same pathway. Voluntary lateral movements may not fully approach the borders and
thus it is recommended that the dentist guide the patient in
these test movements. Contact of the molar cusps on the
nonworking side may overload the teeth or TMJs. Undesirable nonworking contacts are illustrated in Fig.
2-60, F. Avoidance of contacts on the nonworking side is an
important goal for restorative procedures on the molar teeth.
NEUROLOGIC CORRELATES AND CONTROL
OF MASTICATION
This summary of neurologic control is based on an excellent review by Lund. The control of mastication is
dependent on sensory feedback. Sensory feedback
serves to control the coordination of the lips, tongue,
and mandibular movement during manipulation of the
food bolus through all stages of mastication and preparation for swallowing. Physiologists divide an individual chewing cycle into three components: opening, fast
closing, and slow closing. The slow-closing segment of
chewing is associated with the increased forces required
for crushing food. The central nervous system receives
several types of feedback from muscle spindles, periodontal receptors, and touch receptors in the skin and
mucosa. This feedback controls the mandibular closing
muscles during the slow-closing phase. Often sensory
feedback results in inhibition of movement (e.g., because of pain). During mastication some sensory feedback from the teeth is excitatory, causing an increase in
the closing force as the food bolus is crushed. However,
there must be an upper limit where inhibition occurs;
this prevents the buildup of excessive forces on the teeth
during the occlusal stage.
A group of neurons in the brainstem produces bursts
of discharges at regular intervals when excited by oral
sensory stimuli. These bursts drive motor neurons to
produce contractions of the masticatory muscles at regular intervals, resulting in rhythmic mandibular movement. The cluster of neurons in the brainstem that
drives the rhythmic chewing is termed the central pattern generator ( CPG). Oral sensory feedback can modify
the basic CPG pattern and is essential for coordination
of the lips, tongue, and mandible. Sensory input from
the periodontal and mucosal receptors keeps the rhythmic chewing going. During opening, the mandibular
opening muscles are contracted and the closing muscles

CHAPTER 2

Clinical Significance of Dental Anatomy, Histology, Physiology, and Occlusion

inhibited. During closing, the mandibular closing muscles are activated but the opening muscles are not inhibited. Coactivation of the opening and closing muscles makes the mandible more rigid and probably serves
to brace the condyles while the food is crushed. This
Coactivation of the opening and closing muscles also
probably contributes to the rigidity noticed by clinicians
attempting to manipulate the mandible.
The chewing cycles illustrated in Figs. 2-54 to 2-56 are
due to CPG rhythms. Gliding tooth contact occurs frequently during chewing on the working side. These
contacts probably cause an increase in the closing force.
Working-side contacts are forceful and represent about
11% of the maximum possible bite force. The borders of
mandibular function are relevant to construction of dental restorations because forceful contacts occur regularly
during chewing. When the mandibular closure results
in molar contact on the nonworking side, opposite the
food bolus, the teeth or TMjs may be overloaded.
REFERENCES
1. Angle EH: Classification of malocclusion, Dent Cosmos 41:248264,350-357,1899.
2. Brdnnstrom M: Dentin and pulp in restorative dentistry, London, 1982, Wolfe Medical.
3. Carlsson GE, Haraldson T, Mohl ND: The dentition. In Mohl
ND et al, editors: A textbook of occlusion, Chicago, 1988, Quin-

tessence.
4. Celenza FV, Nasedkin JN: Occlusion the state of the art,
Chicago, 1978, Quintessence.
5. Garberoglio R, Brdnnstrom M: Scanning electron microscopic
investigation of human dentinal tubules, Arch Oral Biol
21:355-362,1976.
6. Gibbs CH, Lundeen HC: Jaw movements and forces during

chewing and swallowing and their clinical significance. In
Lundeen HC, Gibbs CH, editors: Advances in occlusion, Bristol, 1982, John Wright PSG.

7. Gibbs CH et al: Functional movements of the mandible,
jProsthet Dent 26:601-610, 1971.
8. Jordan RE, Abrams L, Kraus BS: Kraus' dental anatomy and occlusion, ed 2, St Louis, 1992, Mosby.
9. Kraus BS, Jordan RE, Abrams L: Dental anatomy and occlusion,
ed 1, Baltimore, 1969, Williams & Wilkins.
10. Lund JP: Mastication and its control by the brain stem, Crit
Rev Oral Biol Med 2:33-64, 1991.

11. Lundeen HC, Shryock EF, Gibbs CH: An evaluation of
mandibular border movements: their character and significance, j Prosthet Dent 40:442-452, 1978.
12. Lundeen TF, Mendosa MA: Comparison of Bennett shift
measured at the hinge axis and an arbitrary hinge axis position, j Prosthet Dent 51:407-410, 1984.
13. Lundeen TF, Mendosa MA: Comparison of two methods for
measurement of immediate Bennett shift, j Prosthet Dent
51:243-245, 1984.
14. Lundeen HC, Wirth CG: Condylar movement patterns engraved in plastic blocks, J Prosthet Dent 30:866-875, 1973.
15. Michelich V, Pashley DH, Whitford GM: Dentin permeability:
comparison of function versus anatomic tubular radii, J Dent
Res 57:1019-1024, 1978.
16. Nakabayashi N, Takarada K: Effect of HEMA on bonding to
dentin, Dent Mater 8(2):125-130, 1992.
17. Pashley DH: The effects of acid etching on the pulpodentin
complex, Oper Dent 17(6):229-242,1992.
18. Pashley DH: Clinical correlations of dentin structure and
function, j Prosthet Dent 66(6):777-781, 1991.
19. Posselt U: Studies in the mobility of the mandible, Acta Odont
Scand 10 (Suppl 10), 1952.
20. Scott JH, Symons NBB: Introduction to dental anatomy, ed 7,
Edinburgh, 1974, Churchill Livingstone.
21. Stanley HR: Human pulp response to operative dental procedures, Gainesville, Fla, 1976, Sorter Printing.
22. Sturdevant JR, Pashley DH: Regional dentin permeability of
Class I and 11 cavity preparations (abstract No. 173), J Dent Res
68:203,1989.
23. Van Meerbeek M et al: Comparative SEM and TEM examina-

tion of the ultrastructure of the resin-dentin interdiffusion
zone, J Dent Res 72(2):495-501, 1993.

I.

II.

III.

I V.

I ntroduction and definitions, 65
A. Definitions of caries and plaque, 66
B. Epidemiology of caries, 67
C. Hypotheses concerning the etiology of
caries, 68
D. Ecologic basis of caries, 69
Etiologic agent of caries: pathogenic bacterial
plaque, 69
A. Introductory description of plaque, 69
B. Plaque communities and habitats, 72
C. Development of bacterial plaque: an ecologic
phenomenon, 74
1. Plaque growth, 76
2. Early stages of plaque succession, 77
3. Late stages of plaque succession, 77
4. Plaque community structure, 78
5. Factors that serve as ecologic
determinants, 78
D. Pathophysiology of caries, 90
Clinical characteristics of the lesion, 90
A. Clinical sites for caries initiation, 91
1. Pits and fissures, 91
2. Smooth enamel surfaces, 91
3. Root surface, 92
B. Progression of carious lesions, 92
Histopathology of caries, 92
A. Enamel caries, 92
1. Histology of enamel, 92
2. Clinical characteristics of enamel caries: the
i ncipient smooth-surface lesion, 93
3. Zones of incipient lesion, 94
B. Dentinal caries, 95
1. Histology of dentin, 95
2. Clinical and histologic characteristics of
dentinal caries, acid levels, and reparative
responses, 95

3. Zones of dentinal caries, 99
C. Advanced carious lesions, 99
V.
Management of caries, 101
VI. Caries diagnosis, 102
A. Assessment tools, 102
1. Patient history, 102
2. Clinical examination, 102
3. Nutritional analyses, 102
4. Salivary analyses, 102
5. Radiographic assessment, 102
B. Caries diagnosis for pits and fissures, 104
C. Caries diagnosis for smooth surfaces, 105
D. Caries diagnosis for root surfaces, 107
E. Caries activity tests, 109
VII. Caries prevention, 109
A. General health, 110
B. Fluoride exposure, 110
C. Immunization, 112
D. Salivary functioning, 112
E. Antimicrobial agents, 113
F. Diet, 113
G. Oral hygiene, 114
H. Xylitol gums, 121
I. Pit-and-fissure sealants, 121
J. Restorations, 123
VIII. Caries treatment, 124
A. Caries control restoration, 126
1. Objectives and indications, 126
2. Operative technique, 127
3. Controversies in caries control restorative
treatment procedures, 129
I X. Summary, 130

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

I NTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS

Dental caries (tooth decay) (Figs. 3-1 to 3-5) and periodontal disease are probably the most common chronic
diseases in the world. Although caries has affected humans since prehistoric times, the prevalence of this disease has greatly increased in modern times on a worldwide basis, an increase strongly associated with dietary
change. However, evidence now indicates that this
trend peaked and began to decline in many countries in
the late 1970s and early 1980s, and the decline was most
notable in certain segments of the population of the
United States, western Europe, New Zealand, and Australia." The exact cause of the decline is unknown but is
attributed to the addition of trace amounts of fluoride
ion to public drinking water. Trace amounts of fluoride
were discovered to have a marked limiting effect on the
progression of caries lesions originating on the adjacent
contacting, or proximal, surfaces of teeth. This discovery lead to widespread addition of fluoride to public
water supplies in the 1950s and 1960s and the addition

of fluoride to a variety of oral hygiene products, especially toothpaste. By 1984, 94% of toothpaste products
contained added fluoride . 53
The decline in caries in developed countries such as the
United States has been most prominent in the upper and
middle classes, while the lower socioeconomic classes
and rural residents have retained a higher prevalence of
tooth decay. For example, the Third National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES 111)58 found
that 80% of the caries occurred in 20% of the children,
who were frequently in lower socioeconomic groups or
minorities. This effect has been characterized as a "polarization" of caries, in which a limited segment of the population experiences most of the disease. A similar polarization is occurring on a worldwide basis where the
prevalence of caries is declining in developed countries,
is increasing in less developed countries, and is epidemic
in countries with emerging economies. Thus caries is increasingly being localized in segments of populations
that can least afford the necessary dental treatment.

B

A, A young adult with multiple active carious lesions involving teeth No. 8 to No. 12.
B, Cavitated areas (a) are surrounded by areas of extensive demineralization that are chalky and
opaque (b). Some areas of incipient caries have superficial stain.
FIG. 3-1

A

B
FIG.3-2 Extensive active caries in a young adult (same patient as in Fig. 3-1). A, Mirror view of

teeth No. 20 to No. 25. B, Cavitated lesions (a) are surrounded by extensive areas of chalky,
opaque demineralized areas (b). The presence of smooth-surface lesions like these is associated
with rampant caries. Occlusal and interproximal smooth surface caries usually occur in advance
of facial smooth-surface lesions. The presence of these types of lesions should alert the dentist
to the possibility of extensive caries activity elsewhere in the mouth. The interproximal gingiva
i s swollen red and will bleed easily upon probing. These gingival changes are the consequence
of long-standing irritation from the plaque adherent to the teeth.

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

FIG 3-3

Occlusal, mirror view of teeth No. 2 through No. 5.
These healthy teeth have few suitable habitats for plaque populations. Note that many of the grooves on the occlusal surfaces are coalesced. There are some areas of stain, particul arly in the distal oblique fissure (noncoalesced groove) of the
first molar. This superficial stain is typically found in cariesfree fissures and should not be confused with other color
changes in enamel associated with caries. Compare this with
Figs. 3-19 to 3-22.

FIG 3-4 Facial view of teeth in Fig. 3-3. Note healthy gingiva
and translucent enamel, especially along the crest of the
gingiva. Compare this photo to Fig. 3-2, which shows inflamed gingival tissues. Compare the enamel characteristics
to Fig. 3-25.

The cost of caries to society is enormous. The bill for
dental care in the United States alone was $56.6 billion
in 1999. 62 This represents probably less than half the actual need, considering that only 40% to 50% of the public regularly seek dental care. This published cost represents only the direct expense of dental care services. The
total indirect costs, such as loss of time from work and
the training of dentists, also are substantial. Tooth loss
resulting in diminished chewing ability, which can lead
to nutritional disorders, is a significant problem in
lower socioeconomic groups, for whom replacement
may not be possible for economic reasons. In addition,
caries results in other significant, although intangible,
costs in the form of pain, suffering, and cosmetic defects. In 1986, Walter Loesche described caries and periodontal disease as "perhaps the most expensive infections that most individuals have to contend with during
a lifetime. 47 This statement remains correct today, with
perhaps the exception of human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) infection.

FIG. 3-5 Occlusal view of restored teeth with corroded, ditched
margins. These teeth provide numerous retentive habitats for
plaque communities. Note poor interproximal contours associated with broad, rough contact areas. The corrosion and breakdown at the tooth-restoration interface (margin) produces small
V-shaped defects (ditches) that become new habitats for cariogenic bacteria.

Considering the magnitude and almost universal impact of caries, it is remarkable that a public-supported
program for the eradication of the disease never developed as did programs against polio and smallpox. Caries
eradication depends on the availability of four things:
(1) a potent eradicator weapon (vaccine), (2) strong
and efficient public health service support, (3) popular
support for the program, and (4) an efficient surveillance system to monitor caries activity on a population
level . s° Caries eradication has not been achieved because these four basic requirements have not been met.
In particular, the vaccine is not available. The single
most effective population-based caries control method,
public water fluoridation, is not sufficient to prevent pitand-fissure caries of the posterior teeth. Water fluoridation and fluoride-containing dentifrices are not sufficient to prevent caries in individuals with poor dietary
and oral hygiene practices. Although knowledge is not
sufficient to eradicate caries on a population level, individuals under professional supervision having good dietary and oral hygiene practices can indeed live a cariesfree life.

DEFINITIONS OF CARIES AND PLAQUE
Dental caries is an infectious microbiologic disease of the teeth
that results in localized dissolution and destruction of the cal-

It is essential to understand that cavitations
in teeth (destruction of the tooth surface, creating a
"cavity" or defect) are signs of bacterial infection. In
clinical practice, it is possible to lose sight of this fact
and focus entirely on the restorative treatment of the lesions, thereby failing to treat the underlying cause of the
disease. (See Chapter 9 for a thorough discussion of clinical diagnosis of caries and treatment planning.) Although symptomatic treatment is important, failure to
identify and treat the underlying cause (i.e., the infection of the tooth from odontopathic [causing disease to
the teeth] bacteria) will allow the disease to continue.
cified tissues.

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

The preventive section of this chapter emphasizes the
components of an antibacterial treatment program that
controls the infection by regulation of the oral ecologic
conditions.
Caries activity, as evidenced by demineralization and
loss of tooth structure, is highly variable, and therefore
the course of individual lesions is not always predictable. Carious lesions only occur under a mass of bacteria capable of producing a sufficiently acidic environment to demineralize tooth structure. A gelatinous mass of
bacteria adhering to the tooth surface is termed dental plaque.
The plaque bacteria metabolize refined carbohydrates
for energy and produce organic acids as a by-product.
These acids may cause a carious lesion by dissolution of
the tooth's crystalline structure. Carious lesions progress
as a series of exacerbations and remissions as the pH at
the tooth surface varies with the changes in plaque metabolism. The availability of simple carbohydrates, such
as sucrose, greatly stimulates plaque metabolism. Exacerbations of caries activity are characterized by periods of high bacterial metabolic activity and low pH in
the plaque near the tooth surface. During intervening
episodes when few carbohydrates are available, there is
little bacterial metabolic activity, and the pH rises near
the surface of the tooth. Remineralization of the damaged tooth structure occurs as the local pH rises above
5.5. Saliva contains high concentrations of calcium and
phosphate ions in solution that serve as a supply of raw
material for the remineralization process. Acid attack on
tooth surfaces continually occurs throughout an individual's life. Virtually all of the interproximal (adjacent contacting) surfaces of teeth are attacked by acid produced
by plaque and are partially demineralized. Fortunately,
relatively few tooth surfaces partially demineralized by
plaque acids progress to cavitation. Understanding the
balance between demineralization and remineralization
is the key to enlightened caries management.
The evidence for the role of bacteria in the genesis of
caries is overwhelming. Animal and human models
have been used in an extensive series of studies, leading
to the following conclusions:
1. Teeth free from bacterial infection, either in germ-free
animals or unerupted teeth in humans, do not develop caries.
2. Antibiotics are effective in reducing caries in animals
and humans.
3. Oral bacteria can demineralize enamel in vitro and
produce lesions similar to naturally occurring caries.
4. Specific bacteria can be isolated and identified from
plaque over various carious lesions.
Although the role of bacterial activity in the genesis of
carious lesions is well defined, establishing a cause-andeffect relationship between an individual organism in
the oral flora and caries has not been completely suc-

cessful. Oral bacteria do not occur as solitary colonies,
but as members of a complex community of many species contained as a mass of tightly packed cells held together by the sticky matrix of polymerized glucose. Some
200 to 300 species of bacteria, yeast, and even protozoa
appear to be indigenous to the human oral cavity. The
metabolic activity of the complex community of bacteria
that forms plaque determines the presence or absence of
disease of the adjacent hard and soft tissues. Assessing
the contribution of an individual species to the pathology associated with a complex plaque community has
proven to be very difficult in in vivo systems. It has become clear that a relatively small group of bacteria is
primarily responsible for the two major oral diseasescaries and periodontal disease.
One group of bacteria, which consists of eight Streptococcus mutans serotypes has been associated with caries.
The serotypes have been labeled a through h. Several
serotypes have been elevated to species status and given
names: Streptococcus rattus (serotype b), Streptococcus
cricetus (serotype a), Streptococcus ferus (serotype c), and
Streptoccocus sobrinus (serotypes d, g, and h). All S. mutans serotypes have been demonstrated to have significant potential to cause caries, but because of their significant genetic and biochemical differences, they should
not be simply referred to as the single species S. mutans.
This text uses the term mutans streptococci ( MS) as a collective term for all the serotypes. MS and lactobacilli can
produce great amounts of acids (acidogenic), are tolerant of acidic environments (aciduric), are vigorously
stimulated by sucrose, and appear to be the primary organisms associated with caries in man. Organisms that
cause caries are termed cariogenic. The degree to which a
tooth is likely to become carious is described as its cariogenicity potential. MS are present as a pandemic infection in
humans; that is, MS are found in everyone regardless of
race, ethnic background, or geographic origin. Normally
MS exist in the mouth as an insignificantly small component of the oral flora. In patients with multiple active
carious lesions, MS have become a dominant member of
the plaque flora. MS are most strongly associated with
the onset of caries while lactobacilli are associated with
active progression of cavitated lesions.
EPIDEMIOLOGY OF CARIES
Dental caries has been studied extensively during the
last 50 years in North America and Europe. These epidemiologic studies have been very useful in determining the extent of the need for and effectiveness of dental
treatment. Originally, epidemiology focused on the study
of epidemics, but in modern times epidemiology has expanded to cover any aspect of health needs of a population. A population consists of all individuals located in
a prescribed area. The number of individuals in a population having a disease at a specific point in time is
known as the prevalence of the disease. The number of

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

individuals developing new cases of disease in a population over a specific period of time, usually 1 year, is
the incidence of the disease. The length or duration of the
disease has an important effect on the measures of prevalence and incidence. For short duration diseases, such
as the flu, the incidence and the prevalence are nearly
identical. For diseases that persist over long periods
(years or decades), the prevalence is much higher than
the incidence.
The most common epidemiologic measure of caries is
an evaluation of the number of permanent teeth that are
diseased, missing, or filled (DMF). Measures of primary
teeth are reported as dmf. DMF may be reported as the
number of teeth (DMFT) or surfaces affected (DMFS).
This measure is cumulative because it totals the number
of restorations and extractions in addition to the number
of teeth having active caries. It is presumed that the restored or extracted teeth were treated because of caries at
some point in time before the epidemiologic survey.
Once the tooth is restored or removed, it becomes a permanent measure for the life of the patient. The M and F
components are therefore historical markers of the presence of past disease and should not be confused with the
D, active disease, component. Thus DMF rates are not
equivalent to a true measure of caries prevalence, and in
fact, they overestimate the prevalence of active caries.
Having noted the problems with DMF measures of
caries, it is important to recognize the importance of
DMF in making decisions concerning changes in caries
in populations.
Changes in caries patterns in developed countries
will dramatically affect the nature of operative dentistry
practiced in the near future. For example, in the United
States the percentage of the population over the age of
65 doubled from 1980 to 2000 and will comprise one
fifth of the population by 2030. Thus there will be more
elderly people, and because of a reduced prevalence of
caries, they will have retained more teeth than any preceding generation. However, this large elderly population will be at increased risk for caries, especially on exposed root surfaces. Little is known about the caries risk
in adults, particularly with regard to root caries, except
that the risk increases with age. It is expected that the
prevalence of root caries will increase over the next several decades. Furthermore, both maintenance of teeth
with existing restorations (replacement needs) and new
dental disease will continue the demand for operative
dentistry, despite the decline of caries in children.
The status of caries in third-world countries represents
the greatest challenge to dental science. In developing
economies, income for basic health care needs is minimal, including dental care. Staggering DMF increases,
such as threefold to fivefold increases in children, are reported in widely diverse regions, including Uganda,
Chile, Mexico, Lebanon, and Thailand. It is widely be-

lieved that this increase is due to a substantial rise in dietary sucrose previously unavailable to these populations. Paradoxically, the higher social classes who have
greater exposure to dietary sucrose are frequently the
most affected. Unfortunately, there are many barriers to
treating these populations. In addition to minimal income, social and cultural norms often do not allow ready
acceptance of new oral care and hygiene procedures. The
costs of fluoride toothpaste and simple materials for a
school-based fluoride rinse program often are prohibitive. There usually are few trained dentists and hygienists in these countries to deliver such simple care as
sealants and fluoride treatments. Public water supply
fluoridation would be the best and the least expensive
treatment method, but it can only be applied if public
water availability is adequate and if it is culturally acceptable, and neither criterion typically is met.

HYPOTHESES CONCERNING
THE ETIOLOGY OF CARIES
There are two hypotheses concerning the pathogenicity
of plaque. The older hypothesis promotes the universal
presence of potential pathogens in plaque and therefore
assumes that all accumulations of plaque are pathogenic. The other hypothesis is based on the observation
that accumulation of plaque is not always associated
with disease. Under the latter hypothesis, accumulation
of plaque could be regarded as normal in the absence of
disease. Plaque is assumed to be pathogenic only when
signs of disease are present. The difference between
these two hypotheses has been clearly identified and
discussed by Walter Loesche who, although studying
periodontal disease, applied these concepts equally well
to caries. The first hypothesis, which assumes that all
plaque is pathogenic, is termed the nonspecific plaque
hypothesis. The alternative, or specific plaque hypothesis,
recognizes plaque as pathogenic only when signs of associated disease are present . 18
The problem with the nonspecific plaque hypothesis
is that it requires a therapeutic goal that completely
eliminates plaque in all patients. This goal is unrealistic
and not achievable even in the most dedicated patients.
Treatment under the nonspecific plaque hypothesis requires an open-ended regimen of continuous therapy
directed at total plaque elimination. Dentists trying to
achieve such ambitious goals have inevitably become
frustrated by repeated failure of their patients to achieve
total plaque control and have abandoned such "preventive practices."
The specific plaque hypothesis provides a new scientific basis for the treatment of caries that has radically altered caries treatment (Table 3-1). Plaques can be identified as pathologic when they are associated with clinical
disease. Because only a limited number of microorganisms are capable of caries production, specific plaque

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

New Caries Treatment Based on the
Medical Model

hypothesis treatment is aimed at elimination of the specific pathogenic organisms, but not total plaque elimination. To quote Loesche ;' "The goal of therapy is to
suppress the cariogenic plaques and to replace them
with pathogen-free plaques. This therapeutic goal may
be realized if antimicrobial modalities, such as mechanical debridement and chemical agents, can be applied
with sufficient intensity so as to achieve for short periods on the tooth surface some semblance of 'sterility.' If
such 'sterility' can be obtained, then the newly forming
plaque will be derived from organisms in the bathing
saliva and will contain high proportions of S. sanguis
and S. mitis, and low proportions of S. mutans." The subsequent plaque, dominated by noncariogenic bacteria,
will have little or no cariogenic potential.
ECOLOGIC BASIS OF CARIES
The basic premise of this chapter is that development
and growth of plaque on teeth is a normal phenomenon.
The plaque community structure undergoes a succession
of changes during periods of unrestricted growth. These
changes in the community structure consequently change
the overall metabolism and other characteristics of the
plaque. Community structural changes are predictable
and are governed by general principles of ecology,' which
is the science of interactions between organisms and their
environment. Unrestricted plaque growth produces local
environmental conditions that may selectively promote
the accumulation of pathogenic bacterial species.
High frequency sucrose exposure may be the single
most important factor in producing a cariogenic plaque.
Frequent sucrose ingestion begins a series of changes in
the local tooth environment that promotes the growth of
highly acidogenic bacteria and eventually leads to
caries. In contrast, when sucrose is severely restricted or
absent, plaque growth typically does not lead to caries.
Dietary sucrose plays a leading role in the development
of pathogenic plaques and may be the single most important factor in disruption of the normal healthy ecology of dental plaque communities.

Multiple factors determine the characteristics of
plaque. The factors that control the presence of individual species in plaque are termed ecologic determinants.
These can be divided into several broad interrelated categories: host resistance, extent and nature of shelter for
bacteria, host diet, oral hygiene, status of the dentition,
and composition of the oral flora. These various factors
can be viewed as links in a chain of reactions eventually
leading to caries.
The decline in caries in developed countries is widely
believed to be due primarily to the increased use of fluorides in public water supplies and oral hygiene products. Improvements in oral hygiene, diet, and other factors have been considered to be of much less importance
to the general decline in caries worldwide. However,
the mechanism of caries reduction is not entirely understood and apparently not fully explained by either the
use of fluoride or a reduction in sucrose consumption.
Thus, the other factors once considered to be of little importance, in fact, may have a considerable impact on
caries. Whatever the cause, children in developed countries tend to have less pathogenic plaque than their parents. This is a consequence of a change in the oral ecology of these children.
ETIOLOGIC AGENT OF CARIES:
PATHOGENIC BACTERIAL PLAQUE
I NTRODUCTORY DESCRIPTION OF PLAQUE
As previously stated, the soft, translucent, and tenaciously adherent material accumulating on the surface
of teeth is commonly called plaque. It is more accurately
described as bacterial plaque because it is composed almost completely of bacteria and their by-products
(Figs. 3-6 to 3-10). Plaque is neither adherent food debris, as is widely and erroneously thought, nor does it
result from the haphazard collection of opportunistic
microorganisms. Actually, the accumulation of plaque on
teeth is a highly organized and ordered sequence of events.
Many of the organisms found in the mouth are not
found elsewhere in nature. Survival of microorganisms in
the oral environment depends on their ability to adhere to a
surface. Free-floating organisms are rapidly cleared from
the mouth by salivary flow and frequent swallowing.
Only a few specialized organisms, primarily streptococci, are able to adhere to oral surfaces such as the mucosa and tooth structure. These adherent bacteria have
special receptors for adhesion to the tooth surface and
also produce a sticky matrix that allows them to cohere
to each other. This adherence and coherence allows the
bacteria to successfully colonize the tooth surface. Once
they are attached, these pioneering organisms proliferate and spread laterally to form a matlike covering over
the tooth surface (see Fig. 3-6, C). Further growth of bacteria produces a vertical growth away from (external to)

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

acid production (Fig. 3-14). Since mature plaque is primarily anaerobic, it reduces the available nutrients to
anaerobic metabolites, that is, fermentation products including weak organic acids, amines, and alcohol. Plots
of the pH depression of plaque following a glucose or
sucrose exposure illustrate this phenomenon (Fig. 3-15).
Mature plaque communities rapidly metabolize sucrose
through glycolytic pathways to organic acids, primarily
lactic acid. In cariogenic plaque, virtually all the available sucrose is metabolized to acid, resulting in a severe
and prolonged drop in pH, thereby increasing the potential for enamel demineralization. Demineralization
of enamel occurs in the pH range 5.0 to 5.5. A single sucrose exposure/rinse can produce pH depression lasting up to 1 hour . As discussed later, this prolonged pH
fall has important implications for diet recommendations in the treatment of caries.
Plaque Community Structure. The structure and organization of the plaque community can alter greatly its
pathogenic potential. Communities in dental fissures
with large populations of MS are cariogenic, while similar communities dominated by S. sanguis are not. The
mechanisms responsible for the composition of the climax community are therefore crucial factors in determining the presence of oral disease. As in any ecosystem,
these determinants in their most basic form are food and
shelter. In the oral cavity, the primary source of nutrition
(food) for the oral flora is the host's saliva and diet.
Dietary sucrose, especially when frequently available, provides
a selective advantage to the establishment of
greatly increases

MS

MS

and thus

prevalence in plaque communities.

Factors That Serve as Ecologic Determinants. Eco-

are factors that exert ecologic control
over habitats or niches and ultimately determine the
logic determinants

FIG . 3-14

characteristics of the plaque community. For example,
the supragingival facial and lingual smooth surfaces of
molar teeth are exposed to both saliva and the abrasive
action of the tongue and cheeks. The subgingival areas
immediately below them are protected from abrasion
and saliva but are exposed to plasma exudate from the
adjacent epithelial tissue. The two areas, supragingival
and subgingival smooth surfaces, acquire different
floras as a result of the effects of the local environmental ecologic determinants.
Some of the determinants that control the overall
composition of the plaque community are shelter, pH,
oxygen saturation, and nutrient availability. The essential factor that is least available for plaque organisms
will be the one responsible for limiting the size (the limiting factor) of the population of that species. The bacterial species in plaque have a variety of growth requirements, and one factor limiting the growth of one species
may not limit another. For example, a plaque organism
may be unable to biosynthesize the coenzyme biotin.
The food supply available to that particular organism
may supply amino acids, carbohydrates, and fatty acids
in excess of its needs, but they will go unused because
the limited availability of biotin prevents further growth
of the population. Other limiting factors important in
the oral environment are vitamin K, albumins, hemins,
and oxidation-reduction potentials.
The following sections discuss, in detail, important
factors that serve as ecologic determinants.
Oral (Nontooth) Habitats. The oral mucosa harbors
organisms that are able to attach to the surface of epithelial cells with sufficient retention to overcome the abrasive forces of food, the tongue, and teeth. The size of this
flora is largely controlled by the regular replacement of

Energy flow through plaque community has important consequences to host. Some
of the energy available is completely utilized, noted here as metabolism. However, because
anaerobic metabolism is predominant in plaque community, many molecules are incompletely
metabolized. These anaerobic by-products (metabolites) are primary agents that produce caries
and periodontal disease in host.

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

FIG. 3-6 A, Composite diagram illustrating the re-

l ationship of plaque (p) to the enamel in a smoothsurface incipient lesion. A relatively cell-free layer
of precipitated salivary protein material, the acquired pellicle (ap), covers the perikymata ridges
(pr). The plaque bacteria attach to the pellicle.
Overlapping perikymata ridges (pr) can be seen
on surface of enamel (see Fig. 3-7). Photomicrographs of cross-sections of plaque can be seen in
Figs. 3-8 to 3-10. The enamel is composed of rodl i ke structures (er) that course from the inner DEJ
to the surface of the crown. Striae of Retzius (sr)
can be seen in cross-sections of enamel. (See Figs.
3-1 and 3-2 for typical incipient and cavitated
smooth surface lesions.) B, A higher power view
of the cutout portion of enamel in A. Enamel rods
i nterlock with each other in a head-to-tail orientation. The rod heads are visible on the surface as
slight depressions on the perikymata ridges. The
enamel rods are composed of tightly packed crystallites. The orientation of the crystallites changes
from being parallel to the rod in the head region
to being perpendicular to the rod axis in the tail
end. Striae of Retzius form a descending diagonal
l i ne, descending cervically. C, Drawings 1 through
5 illustrate the various stages in colonization duri ng plaque formation upon the shaded enamel
block shown in B. The accumulated mass of bacteria on the tooth surface may become so thick
that it is visible to the unaided eye. Such plaques
are gelatinous and tenaciously adherent; they
readily take up disclosing dyes, aiding in their visualization for oral hygiene instruction. Thick
plaques (4 and 5) are capable of great metabolic
activity when sufficient nutrients are available.
The gelatinous nature of the plaque limits outward diffusion of metabolic products and thus
serves to prolong the retention of organic acid
metabolic byproducts.

Large segment removed

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

FIG 3-7 A, Scanning electron microscope view (x600) of overlapping perikymata (P) in sound
enamel from unerupted molar. B, Higher power view (x2300) of overlapped site rotated 180 degrees. Surface of incipient enamel lesions has "punched-out" appearance. (From Hoffman S:
Histopathology of caries lesions. In Menaker L, editor: The biologic basis of dental caries, New
York, 1980, Harper & Row.)

FIG.3-8 Photomicrograph (x1350) of bacterial plaque. One-day plaque formation in patient
who is a heavy plaque former. This plaque consists primarily of columnar microcolonies of cocci
(C) growing perpendicular to crown surface (S). (From Listgarten MA, Mayo HE, Tremblay R: J
Periodontol 46(1):19, 1975. Copyright 1975 Munksgaard International Publishers Ltd, Copenhagen, Denmark.)

the tooth surface. The resulting mixed streptococcal
mat allows the adherence of other organisms, such as
filamentous and spiral bacteria, that otherwise are unable to adhere directly to the tooth surface (see Figs.
3-6, C and 3-8 to 3-10). Thus the formation of a mature
plaque community involves a succession of changes
(Fig. 3-11), and each change depends on the preceding

stage preparing the local environment for the next
stage.

PLAQUE COMMUNITIES AND HABITATS
There are significant differences in the plaque communities found in various habitats (ecologic environments)
within the oral cavity (Fig. 3-12). The oral mucosa is

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

FIG. 3-9 Plaque formation at 1 week. Filamentous bacteria (f)
appearto be invading cocci microcolonies. Plaque near gingival
sulcus has fewer coccal forms and more filamentous bacteria
( x860). (From Listgarten MA, Mayo HE, Tremblay R: J Park
odontol 46(1):10, 1975. Copyright 1975 Munksgaard International Publishers Ltd, Copenhagen, Denmark.)

FIG . 3-10 At 3 weeks old, plaque is almost entirely composed
of filamentous bacteria. Heavy plaque formers have spiral
bacteria (a) associated with subgingival plaque (x660). (From
Listgarten MA, Mayo HE, Tremblay R: J Periodontol 46(1):10,
1975. Copyright 1975 Munksgaard International Publishers
Ltd, Copenhagen, Denmark.)

FIG 3-11 Succession in plaque communities results from a
shift to predominantly anaerobic conditions within the mass
of plaque. Note that over a period of 9 days relative proportions of aerobic and anaerobic species change dramatically.
(From HL Ritz: Arch Oral Biol, 12, 1967, Pergamon.)

populated by organisms with receptors specialized for
attachment to the surface of epithelium. The dorsum of
the tongue has a plaque community dominated by S.
salivarius. The teeth normally have a plaque community
dominated by S. sanguis and S. mitis. The population
size of MS on teeth is highly variable. Normally it is a
very small percentage of the total plaque population,
but it can be as large as one half the facultative streptococcal flora in other plaques.
Many distinct habitats may be identified on individual
teeth, with each habitat containing a unique plaque community (Table 3-2). While the pits and fissures on the
crown may harbor a relatively simple population of
streptococci, the root surface in the gingival sulcus may
harbor a very complex community dominated by filamentous and spiral bacteria. Facial and lingual smooth
surfaces and proximal surfaces also may harbor vastly
different plaque communities. For example, the mesial
surface of a molar may be carious and have a plaque
dominated by large populations of MS and lactobacilli,
while the distal surface may totally lack these organisms
and be caries free. Therefore, generalization about plaque
communities is difficult. Nevertheless, the general activity of plaque growth and maturation is predictable and
sufficiently well known to be of therapeutic importance
in the prevention of caries.

CHAPTER

Coronal
plaque

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

Gingival
crevice

Tongue
dorsum

Buccal
mucosa

FIG . 3-12 Approximate proportional distribution of predominant cultivable flora of four oral
habitats. (From Morhart R, Fitzgerald R: Composition and ecology of the oral flora. In Menaker
L, editor. The biologic basis of dental caries, New York, 1980, Harper & Row.)

"The microenvironmental conditions in the habitats associated with host health are generally aerobic, near neutrality in pH, and positive in
oxidation-reduction potential. Significant microenvironmental changes are associated with caries and periodontal disease. The changes are the
result of the plaque community metabolism.

DEVELOPMENT OF BACTERIAL PLAQUE:
AN ECOLOGIC PHENOMENON
The complex and dynamic relationships among bacterial plaque, the host, and dental disease are best understood by viewing dental disease as a result of the functioning of an ecologic system that operates on widely

known and accepted ecologic principles. An ecosystem is
a circumscribed area occupied by a biologic community.
The oral cavity is a well-defined ecosystem because it
has recognized geographic limits and the general composition of the biologic community is known. Within
the oral ecosystem are distinct habitats (see Table 3-2)

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

such as the dorsum of the tongue; oral mucosa; gingival
sulcus; and various tooth locations, including pits, fissures, and certain smooth surface areas. These habitats
have unique environmental conditions and harbor significantly different communities of microorganisms (see
Figs. 3-3 to 3-5). Within each habitat, special combinations of food and shelter are available to support particular species of oral bacteria. This special combination of
food and shelter is termed an ecologic niche.
A particular niche is generally occupied by a single,
best-adapted species. Thus for each habitat, a dental fissure for example, a limited number of niches are available to the oral flora. Organisms present in the greatest
numbers in the saliva occupy the niches. If an organism
already occupies the niches on the teeth, new opportunistic organisms will be excluded and prevented from
becoming a part of the plaque. This process can prevent
pathologic organisms (e.g., MS) from being established
on already covered plaque surfaces. Thus plaques dominated by normal oral flora, such as S. sanguis, may be
considered desirable because of their ability to control or
prohibit the introduction of more pathogenic organisms.
As a plaque community develops on a tooth surface,
eventually all the available niches will become occupied. When niche saturation occurs, only very competitive microorganisms can displace the indigenous bacteria from the community. Niche saturation provides
inherent stability to plaque communities. Although large
numbers of foreign organisms pass through the oral
cavity, it is rare for any to become established as permanent residents. Niche saturation may be the mechanism
that prevents these multitudes of exogenous organisms
from becoming established in the mouth. This homeostatic mechanism has been termed colonization resistance.
Colonization resistance can be quantified by measuring
the threshold dose (number of organisms) required to
establish a new resident population. MS have a very
high threshold dose because they must compete with S.
sanguis for niches. S. sanguis is more efficient in adhering to tooth surfaces than MS and, thus, is established
more rapidly in the local community . Thus the threshold dose (the total number of bacteria inoculated into
the mouth) is a critical factor for establishment of an organism in plaque communities. This concept forms the
basis for bacteriologic testing of saliva to determine
caries risk.
In normal healthy circumstances, the oral flora capable of colonizing the teeth are not capable of causing
disease. For MS to spread to other tooth surfaces, it
must be present in sufficient numbers in the saliva to
overcome the colonization resistance afforded by the
normal oral flora. Therefore it should be noted that an
active carious lesion can serve as a reservoir of MS and
lactobacilli, providing the large threshold dose necessary to establish infections on other tooth surfaces. Millions of MS and lactobacilli are continually lost from the

surface of active carious lesions. Consequently, it is essential to eliminate carious lesions because they may become the source for pathogenic infection of noncariogenic plaques. Restoration of carious lesions has significant
beneficial clinical effects in addition to the benefit of restoration of the damaged tooth structure and maintenance of pulpal vitality because the restorative process also effectively removes a nidus of infection.

Some strains of MS are easier than others to establish
in a host. This difference may be due in part to their ability to produce proteins called bacteriocins, which are
lethal to closely related bacteria. Bacteriocin production
is an ecologic adaptation that allows an organism to be
more effective in competition with similar bacteria for
the same niche . 3 ° Thus, bacteriocin production is an important ecologic determinant. Persistent colonization of
the teeth by bacteriocin-producing MS has been demonstrated .34,3s Bacteriocin production by itself is probably
insufficient to allow MS to become a dominant plaque
species. However, a combination of bacteriocin-producing MS with poor diet and oral hygiene can lead to a
very extensive and persistent infection. 34,35
The addition of another isolated and purified bacteriocin (known to inhibit MS) to the diet of rats had little
effect when the availability of sucrose was good, but
when sucrose was limited, the bacteriocin killed MS and
related streptococci. This suggests a possible therapeutic role for bacteriocins. Many oral bacteria produce bacteriocins that are effective against MS, and it is possible
that some bacterial strains could give the host some immunity to caries when they are present. As already mentioned, bacteriocins effective against MS have been
identified and purified .49 Therefore an effective therapeutic treatment for caries could be the replacement of
normal inhabitants of the oral cavity with strains having
enhanced bacteriocin activity against the more pathogenic organisms (such as MS). Some habitats on the
teeth encourage caries by virtue of their physical shape.
The pits and fissures of teeth are the most susceptible areas to caries and the most favorable habitat for MS.
These deep recesses not only shelter bacteria residing in
them but also limit access of salivary factors that attenuate and repair demineralization. Obturation of these
anatomic faults by occlusal sealants or restorations prevents caries and greatly reduces the numbers of MS in
the mouth. This is an excellent example of ecologic control of an undesirable plaque organism without wholesale disruption of the remainder of the oral flora. Sealing the pits and fissures eliminates a habitat of MS and
is an example of disease prevention based on sound ecologic principles.
Likewise, tooth malalignment also can contribute to
caries problems by providing sheltered areas for plaque
retention. Correction of these problems by orthodontic
or prosthodontic treatment can contribute to the overall
oral health of the patient.

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

Plaque Growth. The growth of plaque is not the result
of a random accumulation of opportunistic organisms
passing through the oral cavity. Rather, an orderly sequence of replacement communities occupies the tooth
surface, each community modifying the local environment of that site. The available niches, the limiting factors, and the environment conditions change as a result
of the biologic activity of each plaque community. This
process of mutual change of the community and its environment is called ecologic succession (see Fig. 3-11). Individual stages in a succession sequence are known as
seres and the final stage of succession is a stable biologic
community termed the climax community. Two different
types of succession occur, and both can be identified in
the oral cavity. In general ecology, primary succession occurs as the process of development of a biologic community where none previously existed. Applied to the
oral cavity, primary succession is the process of normal
change in the oral flora occurring over the lifetime of an
individual host. Secondary succession is the process of restoration of the climax community after a disruption in
the community structure. Secondary succession as it applies to the teeth is the process of plaque regrowth after
the tooth surface is cleaned. If the environmental condi-

tions remain the same, secondary succession will result
in an identical climax community. Thus a similar plaque
will reform on the teeth after prophylaxis if there is no
other change in the oral environmental conditions.
Primary succession occurs over the lifetime of the
host. For example, a newborns mouth is rapidly occupied by skin bacteria and S. salivarius. Newborns lack
teeth and therefore cannot harbor organisms adapted to
tooth habitats. Transient organisms, such as Escherichia
coli, may be noted, but they fail to establish a permanent
residence in the oral cavity. Major changes in the species
composition of the oral cavity occur with the eruption of
teeth because the teeth supply new habitats. In the adult,
the general composition of a well-established oral flora
remains relatively stable if there are no major changes in
the health of the host. Loss of all teeth in elderly patients
results in the loss of organisms specialized for tooth attachment and, consequently, the oral flora reverts to a
composition similar to that of a newborn.
Plaque growth first consists of surface attachment
and then lateral spreading as the attached organisms
multiply (Fig. 3-13). When the entire surface is covered,
growth of the colonies increases the thickness of the
plaque. As the original colonizing organisms prolifer-

Facial
plaque

FIG. 3-13

Plaque formation on posterior teeth and associated carious lesions. A, Teeth No. 19
and No. 20 in contacting relationship. B, The crown of tooth No. 20 has been removed at the
cervix. The proximal contact and subcontact plaque can be seen on the mesial surface of No.
19. A facial plaque is also illustrated. C, During periods of unrestricted growth, the mesial and

facial plaques become part of a continuous ring of plaque around the teeth. Continuous rings of
carious lesions can be seen in Fig. 3-25. D, A horizontal cross-section through teeth No. 19 and
No. 20 with heavy plaque. The inset shows the interproximal space below the contact area filled
with gelatinous plaque. This mass of interproximal plaque concentrates the effects of plaque
metabolism on the adjacent tooth smooth surfaces. All interproximal surfaces are subject to
plaque accumulation and acid demineralization. In patients exposed to fluoridated water, most
i nterproximal lesions become arrested at a stage before cavitation.

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

ate, their progeny produce vertical columns of cells
called palisades (see Figs. 3-6, C and 3-8 to 3-10). The palisades can be invaded by filamentous bacteria that otherwise could not exist on the tooth surface. Proliferation
of the new, invading bacteria produce tangled masses of
filaments extending upward, away from the surface of
the tooth. Plaques may grow to become many thousands of cells thick, resulting in interesting plaque structures such as "corn cobs," which consist of filaments
with cocci attached (see Fig. 3-6, C, 5). These probably
indicate preferential attachment of two types of organisms that each derive some benefit from the attachment.
Early Stages of Plaque Succession. Professional
tooth cleaning is a practice that is intended to control
plaque and prevent disease. After professional removal
of all organic material and bacteria from a tooth surface,
a new coating of organic material begins to accumulate
immediately. Within 2 hours a cell-free, structureless organic film, the pellicle (see Fig. 3-6, A and C), can completely cover the previously denuded area. The pellicle
is formed primarily from the selective precipitation of
various components of saliva. The functions of the pellicle are believed to be: (1) protect the enamel, (2) reduce
friction between the teeth, and (3) possibly provide a
matrix for remineralization. The pellicle is formed from
salivary proteins that have apparently evolved for this
function. These proteins have many basic groups and
consequently adsorb to the phosphate ions while other
acidic proteins adsorb to calcium ions. Among the salivary proteins isolated from the pellicle are lysozyme,
albumin, and immunoglobulins A (IgA) and G (IgG).
Some of these proteins are biologically active and have
a significant impact on microorganisms attempting to
colonize the tooth surface (Table 3-3). The strong affinity

TEBLE 3-3

of salivary proteins for exposed hydroxyapatite is also
of critical importance in operative dentistry, because
salivary contamination of a freshly etched enamel surface prevents bonding of composite restorations (see
Chapters 11 to 15).
The early stages of recolonization of the cleaned tooth
surface (early secondary succession) involve adhesion
between the pellicle and the pioneering organisms. The
number and type of organisms available, floating free in
the saliva, determine how the tooth surface is colonized.
Some organisms have a selective advantage due to their
superior ability to attach to hydroxyapatite or to the acquired pellicle. S. sanguis along with Actinomyces viscosus, Actinomyces naeslundii, and Peptostreptococcus are the
main pioneering species and are capable of attaching to
the pellicle within 1 hour after tooth cleaning." The adhesion process is very selective and requires specific organism receptors capable of binding to certain areas on
the precipitated salivary proteins of the pellicle. For example, the enzyme glucosyltransferase may be of critical importance in the adherence of MS to the pellicle
when sucrose is present because it enhances the polymerization of the extracellular matrix that makes MS
form such tenaciously adherent colonies.
Late Stages of Plaque Succession. The late stages
of ecologic succession in plaque are responsible for
causing either caries or periodontal disease. Early stages
(seres) in a plaque succession are generally lacking in
pathogenic potential because they are primarily aerobic
communities and lack sufficient numbers or proper types
of organisms to produce sufficient quantities of damaging metabolites. However, as the plaque matures, the
production of cells and matrix slows and utilization of
energy for the total community metabolism results in

Elements of Saliva That Control Plaque Communities

IgA, Immunoglobulin A; IgG, immunoglobulin G; IgM, immunoglobulin M.

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

Changes in Mineral Content Over Time

F I G. 3-15 A, Mature plaque communities have tremendous metabolic potential and are capable
of very rapid anaerobic metabolism of any available carbohydrates. Classic studies by Stephan"
demonstrate this metabolic potential by severe pH drops at plaque-enamel interface following
glucose rinse. It is generally agreed that a pH of 5.5 is the threshold for enamel demineralization. Note that exposure to a glucose rinse for an extreme caries activity plaque results in a sustained period of demineralization (pH 5.5). Recording from a slight caries activity plaque demonstrates a much shorter period of demineralization. B, The frequency of sucrose exposure for
cariogenic plaque greatly influences the progress of tooth demineralization. The top line illustrates pH depression, patterned after the Stephan's curves in A. Three meals per day results in
three exposures of plaque acids, each lasting approximately 1 hour. The plaque pH depression
i s relatively independent of the quantity of sucrose ingested. Between-meal snacks or the use
of sweetened breath mints results in many more acid attacks, as illustrated at the bottom. The
effect of frequent ingestion of small quantities of sucrose results in a nearly continuous acid attack on the tooth surface. The clinical consequences of this behavior can be seen in Fig. 3-34.
C, In active caries there is a progressive loss of mineral content subjacent to the cariogenic
plaque. The inset illustrates that the loss is not a continuous process. Instead, there are alternating periods of mineral loss (demineralization) with intervening periods of remineralization.
The critical event for the tooth is cavitation of the surface, marked by the vertical dashed line.
This event marks an acceleration in caries destruction of the tooth and irreversible loss of tooth
structure. For these reasons, restorative intervention is required. (A modified from Stephan RM:
J Dent Res 23(4):257, 1944.)

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

the mucosal surface. To successfully survive in this habitat, the organisms (primarily streptococci) must attach,
grow, multiply, then drop off the surface, and finally reattach to new cell surfaces. Because the washing effects
of salivary flow cause many of these organisms to be removed from the mouth, the organisms living on the oral
mucosa must reproduce in great numbers to ensure survival by reattachment.
The dorsum of the tongue presents a different oral
habitat because its surface is covered with papillae. This
rough topography provides additional shelter not available on the mucosal surface. S. salivarius and Micrococcus mucilaginous are two species commonly found on
the tongue but rarely found on teeth.
The prevailing environmental conditions on both
the mucosa and the tongue are largely determined by
the saliva. Both of these habitats are aerobic, have
neutral pH, and are positive in oxidation-reduction potential, and yet they harbor different communities of
organisms.
Tooth Habitats for Pathogenic Plaque. The tooth
surface is unique because it is not protected by the surface shedding mechanisms (continual replacement of

epithelial cells) used throughout the remainder of the
alimentary canal. The tooth surface is stable and covered with the pellicle of precipitated salivary glycoproteins, enzymes, and immunoglobulins. It is the ideal
surface for the attachment of many oral streptococci. If
left undisturbed, plaque will rapidly build up to sufficient depth to produce an anaerobic environment adjacent to the tooth surface. Tooth habitats favorable for
harboring pathogenic plaque include: (1) pits and fissures; (2) the smooth enamel surfaces both immediately
gingival to the proximal contacts and in the gingival one
third of the facial and lingual surfaces of the clinical
crown; (3) root surfaces, particularly near the cervical
line; and (4) subgingival areas (see Fig. 3-16, A through
C). These sites correspond to the locations where caries
is most frequently encountered.
Pits and fissures. Pit-and-fissure caries has the highest prevalence of all dental caries (Figs. 3-16 to 3-22).
The pits and fissures provide excellent mechanical shelter for organisms and harbor a community dominated
by S. sanguis and other streptococci. 39 The relative proportion of MS most probably determines the cariogenic
potential of the pit-and-fissure community. Complex

FIG 3-16 A, Caries may originate at many distinct sites: pits and fissures (a), smooth surface of
crown (b), root surface (c). Proximal surface lesion of crown is not illustrated here because it is
a special case of smooth surface lesion. Histopathology and progress of both facial (or lingual)
and proximal lesions are identical. The dotted line indicates cut used to reveal cross-sections ill ustrated in Figs. 3-16, a and C. B, In cross-section, the three types of lesions demonstrate different rates of progression and different morphology. Lesions illustrated here are intended to be
representative of each type. No particular association between three lesions is implied. Pit-andfissure lesions have small sites of origin visible on occlusal surface but have wide base. Overall
shape of pit-and-fissure lesion is inverted V. In contrast, smooth-surface lesion is V-shaped with
wide area of origin and apex of V directed toward pulp (p). Root caries begins directly on dentin.
Root-surface lesions can progress rapidly because dentin is less resistant to caries attack. C, Advanced carious lesions produce considerable histologic change in enamel, dentin, and pulp. Bacterial invasion of lesion results in extensive demineralization and proteolysis of the dentin. Clini cally this necrotic dentin appears soft, wet, and mushy. Deeper pulpally, dentin is demineralized
but not invaded by bacteria and is structurally intact. This tissue appears to be dry and leathery
i n texture. Two types of pulp-dentin response are illustrated. Under pit-and-fissure lesion and
smooth-surface lesion, odontoblasts have died, leaving empty tubules called dead tracts (dt). New
odontoblasts have been differentiated from pulp mesenchymal cells. These new odontoblasts
have then produced reparative dentin (rd), which seals off dead tracts. Another type of pulpdentin reaction is sclerosis (s)-occlusion of the tubules by peritubular dentin. This is illustrated
under root caries lesion.

CHAPTER

A

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

C

FIG 3-17 Developmental pits, grooves, and fissures on the crowns of the teeth can have complex and varied anatomy. A and B, The facial developmental groove of the lower first molar often
terminates in a pit. The depth of the groove and the pit is highly variable. C and D, The central
groove extends from the mesial pit to the distal pit. Sometimes grooves extend over the marginal ridges. E, The termination of pits and fissures may vary from a shallow groove (a) to complete penetration of the enamel (b). The end of the fissure may end blindly (c) or open into an
i rregular chamber (d).

81

CHAPTER3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

FIG 3-18 Progression of caries in pits and fissures. A, The initial lesions develop on the lateral
walls of the fissure. Demineralization follows the direction of the enamel rods, spreading laterally as it approaches the DEJ. B, Soon after the initial enamel lesion occurs, a reaction can be
seen in the dentin and pulp. Forceful probing of the lesion at this stage can result in damage to
the weakened porous enamel and accelerate the progression of the lesion. Clinical detection at
this stage should be based on observation of discoloration and opacification of the enamel adjacent to the fissure. These changes can be observed by careful cleaning and drying of the fissure.
C, Initial cavitation of the opposing walls of the fissure cannot be seen on the occlusal surface.
Opacification can be seen that is similar to the previous stage. Remineralization of the enamel because of trace amounts of fluoride in the saliva may make progression of pit-and-fissure lesions
more difficult to detect. D, Extensive cavitation of the dentin and undermining of the covering
enamel will darken the occlusal surface (see Fig. 3-19).

B
FIG 3-19 A, Mandibular first molar has undermined discolored enamel due to extensive pitand-fissure caries. Lesion began as illustrated in Fig. 3-18 and has progressed to stage illustrated in Fig. 3-18, D. B, Discolored enamel is outlined by broken line in the central fossa region.

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

communities dominated by filamentous bacteria, such
as those in the gingival crevice, apparently fail to develop in the pit-and-fissure habitat .23 The appearance of
MS in pits and fissures is usually followed by caries, 6 to
24 months later. Sealing the pits and fissures just after tooth
eruption may be the single most important event in providing
their resistance to caries.
Smooth enamel surfaces. The proximal enamel sur-

faces immediately gingival of the contact area are the
second most susceptible areas to caries (Figs. 3-:a3 and
3-24; also see Figs. 3-16 and 3-21). These areas are protected physically and are relatively free from the effects
of mastication, tongue movement, and salivary flow.
The types and numbers of organisms making up the
proximal surface plaque community are variable. Important ecologic determinants for the plaque community on the proximal surfaces are the topography of the
tooth surface, the size and shape of the gingival papillae, and the oral hygiene of the patient. A rough surface
(caused by caries, a poor quality restoration [new or
old], or a structural defect) restricts adequate plaque removal. This results in retention of a more advanced successional plaque stage, favoring the occurrence of caries
or periodontal disease at the site.

In very young patients, the gingival papilla completely fills the interproximal space under a proximal
contact and is termed a col. Thus the proximal surfaces
of very young patients are in crevicular spaces that are
less favorable habitats for MS. Consequently, proximal
caries is less likely to develop where this favorable soft
tissue architecture exists. Conversely, apical migration
of the papillae creates more habitats in exposed environments for tooth surface-colonizing bacteria. Increasing the exposed surface area has a stimulating effect on
the growth of MS. Therefore poor soft tissue form tends
to stimulate plaque growth in the sheltered proximal areas, rendering them more susceptible to both caries and
periodontal disease. More vigorous and conscientious
oral hygiene practices are required to keep these open
proximal regions free of disease.
Often the gingival aspect of the facial and lingual
smooth enamel surface that is supragingival but gingival of the occlusogingival height of contour is neither
rubbed by the bolus of food nor cleaned by the toothbrush. Therefore these surface areas are habitats for the
caries-producing mature plaque. The presence of caries
in these areas usually is indicative of a caries-active
mouth (Fig. 3-25; also see Figs. 3-1, 3-2, and 3-39).

B

C

D
FIG. 3-20

Progression of pit-and-fissure caries. A, The mandibular right first molar (No. 30) was
sealed. Note radiolucent areas under the occlusal enamel in A and B. The seal failed and caries
progressed slowly during the next 5 years, the only symptom was occasional biting-force pain.
C and D, Note the extensive radiolucency under the enamel and an area of increased radiopacity below the lesion, suggesting sclerosis.

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

B

D

FIG . 3-21
A young patient with extensive caries. A and B, The occlusal pits of the first molar and
second premolar are carious. There is an interproximal carious lesion on the second premolar.
The second premolar is rotated almost 90 degrees bringing the lingual surface into contact with
the mesial surface of the first molar. Normally, the lingual surfaces of the mandibular teeth are
rarely attacked by caries, but here, the tooth rotation makes the lingual surface a proximal contact and, consequently, produces an interproximal habitat, which increases the susceptibility of
the surface to caries. C and D, The first and second molars have extensive caries in the pits and
fissures. On the bitewing radiograph (E and F), not only can the extensive nature of the caries
i n the second premolar be seen, but also seen is a lesion on the distal aspect of the first molar,
which is not visible clinically. (Colored areas in B, D, and F indicate caries.)

Root surfaces. The proximal root surface, particularly
near the cervical line, is often unaffected by the action of
hygiene procedures such as flossing because it may have
concave anatomic surface contours (fluting) and occasional roughness at the termination of the enamel. These
conditions, when coupled with exposure to the oral environment (as a result of gingival recession), favor the
formation of mature, caries-producing plaque and proximal root-surface caries. Likewise, the facial or lingual

root surfaces (particularly near the cervical line), when
exposed to the oral environment (because of gingival recession), are often both neglected in hygiene procedures
and usually not rubbed by the bolus of food. Consequently, these root surfaces also frequently harbor cariesproducing plaque. Root-surface caries is more common
in older patients because of niche availability and other
factors sometimes associated with senescence, such as
decreased salivary flow and poor oral hygiene due to

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

Caries

B

D

C
FIG . 3-22 Example of occlusal caries that is actually much more extensive than is apparent clini cally. A and B, Clinical example. C and D, A bitewing radiograph further reveals an extensive
area of demineralization undermining the distofacial cusp.

FIG. 3-23 Bitewing radiograph of normal teeth, free from caries. Note the uniform density of the
enamel on the interproximal surfaces. Athird molar is impacted on the distal aspect of the lower
second molar. The interproximal bone levels are uniform and located slightly below the cementoenamel junctions, suggesting a healthy periodontium.

lowered digital dexterity and decreased motivation. Caries originating on the root is alarming because: (1) it has
a comparatively rapid progression, (2) it is often asymptomatic, (3) it is closer to the pulp, and (4) it is more difficult to restore.
Subgingival areas. The gingival sulcus (or crevice)
habitat is unique. The initial occupants of the sulcus are
merely an extension of the plaque community on the immediately adjacent surface of the tooth. Metabolites re-

leased from plaque easily penetrate the thin epithelial
lining of the sulcus, inducing a strong inflammatory reaction. The capillaries dilate and become very permeable, resulting in the leakage of blood plasma into the tissue. Some metabolites have chemotactic properties that
induce infiltration of white blood cells into the region.
The gingival inflammatory reaction results in the sulcular tissue release of plasmalike fluid-containing immunoglobulins, polymorphonuclear leukocytes, albumins,

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

FIG . 3-24 Longitudinal sections (see insetfor A) showing initiation and progression of caries on
i nterproximal surfaces. A, Initial demineralization (indicated by the shading in the enamel) on
the proximal surfaces is not detectable clinically or radiographically. All proximal surfaces are
demineralized to some degree, but most are remineralized and become immune to further attack.
The presence of small amounts of fluoride in the saliva virtually ensures that remineralization
and immunity to further attack will occur. B, When proximal caries first becomes detectable radiographically, the enamel surface is likely to still be intact. An intact surface is essential for successful remineralization and arrest of the lesion. Demineralization of the dentin (indicated by the
shading in the dentin) occurs before cavitation of the surface of the enamel. Treatment designed
to promote remineralization can be effective up to this stage. C, Cavitation of the enamel surface
i s a critical event in the caries process in proximal surfaces. Cavitation is an irreversible process
and requires restorative treatment/correction of the damaged tooth surface. Cavitation can only
be diagnosed by clinical observation. The use of a sharp explorer to detect cavitation is problematic because excessive force in application of the explorer tip during inspection of the proximal
surfaces can damage weakened enamel and accelerate the caries process by creating cavitation.
Separation of the teeth can be used to provide more direct visual inspection of suspect surfaces.
Fiber-optic illumination and dye absorption are also promising new evaluation procedures, but
neither is specific for cavitation. D, Advanced cavitated lesions require prompt restorative intervention to prevent pulpal disease, limit tooth structure loss, and remove the nidus of infection
of odontopathic organisms.

and hemins. These immunologic materials may change
some characteristics of the adjacent plaque by removing
the most susceptible organisms. New niches then become available because of the loss of some species and
the availability of new nutrients. The plaque community
changes progressively from masses of cocci in the supragingival plaque to a community dominated by filamentous bacteria and spirochetes in the subgingival habitat.
Bacteroides melaninogenicus can exploit this habitat, because proteins and iron-containing compounds (hemins)
are available. The establishment of a sizable population
of B. melaninogenicus results in a very pathogenic plaque
because this organism produces several enzymes capable of destroying the gingival epithelium.
Oral Hygiene. Another ecologic determinant is oral
hygiene. Careful mechanical cleaning of the teeth disrupts the bacterial plaque and leaves a clean enamel

surface. The recolonization of the tooth surface occurring after tooth cleaning is properly termed secondary
succession. This process is much more rapid than primary succession because all normal residents of the climax community of plaque are already present in the
oral cavity. The cleaning process does not actually destroy most of the oral bacteria, but merely removes them
from the surfaces of the teeth. Large numbers of these
bacteria are subsequently removed from the oral cavity
during rinsing and swallowing after flossing and brushing, but sufficient numbers remain to recolonize the
teeth. Some fastidious organisms and obligate anaerobes may in fact be killed by exposure to oxygen during
tooth cleaning. However, no single species is likely to be
entirely eliminated. Although all the species that make
up mature plaque will continue to be present, most of
these are unable to initiate colonization on the clean

CHAPTER

3

87

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

A

B

C

D
3-25 Facial and lingual smooth-surface caries. This patient has very high caries activity
with rapidly advancing caries lesions. Plaque, containing MS, extends entirely around the cervical areas of the posterior teeth. Several levels of caries involvement can be seen including:
cavitation (c); incipient white spot lesions (i); and stained, roughened, partially remineralized
i ncipient lesions (s).
FIG

tooth surface. To return to the climax community of
plaque, the tooth surface must be sequentially colonized, and the local environment must be returned to
the climactic condition.
Until the environment of the climax community of
plaque is restored, many of its residents are unable to
grow. The pioneering organisms can have an important
effect on the nature of the climax community. In experimental studies, the initial colonization of artificial fissures has been shown to depend on the relative abundance of organisms in the saliva. MS and S. sanguis are
competitive pioneering organisms. Only when MS are
present in great numbers in the saliva can the organism
establish itself as a significant member of the resulting
mature plaque. It is of obvious benefit to the host to favor the establishment of large populations of S. sanguis
on the teeth because MS are considerably more cariogenic than S. sanguis. Simple oral hygiene proceduresflossing and brushing-help achieve this desired result
by frequently disrupting the plaque succession. In the absence of a high-sucrose diet, this frequent disruption favors the preferential growth of S. sanguis rather than MS.
Available Nutrients. The nutrients necessary for
plaque growth are considered ecologic determinants.
The nutritional requirements of plaque organisms can
vary from simple to complex. All living organisms

maintain themselves by two basic antagonistic processes: catabolic and anabolic reactions. Catabolic reactions break down complex molecules, such as carbohydrates and proteins, and release useful energy. Anabolic
reactions require energy to build complex cellular molecules from simple precursors. The pioneering or initiating organisms that first colonize a tooth surface must,
by necessity, have simple nutritional requirements. They
must be able to catabolize almost any available energycontaining molecule. Furthermore, because they rely on
the host for diet and salivary flow, they must be able to
produce anabolically all necessary cellular components
from relatively simple precursors. For example, MS and
S. sanguis can produce all their amino acid needs from
the metabolism of normally available salivary proteins.
Organisms with complex nutritional requirements cannot occupy a tooth surface until such specific nutrients
become available.
The nature and quality of the nutrient supply vary
significantly from habitat to habitat. Supragingival areas on teeth characteristically have high oxygen concentrations, good carbohydrate availability, and are
continually bathed in saliva. These areas are characteristically inhabited by facultative streptococci using carbohydrates as their primary energy source. Sucrose in
the diet of the host strongly favors the establishment of

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

MS as a predominant member of the supragingival
plaque. The subgingival habitat on the same tooth has
low oxygen saturation, low carbohydrate availability,
and few salivary components. Both hemorrhage and released sulcular tissue fluid in the subgingival habitat
provide a rich variety of proteins and other complex
molecules as nutrients. Thus, there is a strong selection
pressure in the subgingival habitat for anaerobic bacteria that use proteins as their primary energy source. B.
melaninogenicus is an obligate anaerobe that requires
hemins and albumins for its growth and primarily depends on proteins as a source of energy. This particular
organism can establish residency in a subgingival plaque
only after the plaque has caused both an anaerobic interior environment and gingival bleeding. B. melaninogenicus produces strong proteolytic enzymes, including
hyaluronidase and collagenase, and is thought to be
one of the primary causative agents of periodontal disease. Its presence in plaque is largely controlled by the
availability of its special nutritional requirements. Therefore, by keeping the plaque at an earlier aerobic successional stage and eliminating periodontal pockets, it
is possible to prevent B. melaninogenicus from becoming
a threat to the periodontium.
Fig. 3-14 illustrates energy flow through a hypothetical plaque ecosystem. Four sources of energy are listed.
The host's diet frequently supplies the majority of the
energy requirements of the plaque community in the
form of fermentable carbohydrates. The plaque community also can be entirely supported by the host's saliva.
Sulcular fluid and desquamated epithelial cells may
play small, but important roles in supporting plaque
residents such as B. melaninogenicus.
The energy input to plaque supports a large number of
organisms. The energy trapped in their cell bodies can be
considered stored. Because of the inherent unreliability
of the host's diet, it is expected that these plaque organisms have mechanisms to store carbohydrates intracellularly or extracellularly. The intracellular storage mechanism is the storage of glycogen-like granules that can be
demonstrated by iodine staining. The extracellular storage mechanism is in the form of a variety of polysaccharides. These extracellular polysaccharides also serve
other functions for the organism such as adhesion, diffusion limitation, and protection. Other energy-containing
materials are trapped within the plaque matrix and
make a small addition to the total stored energy.
There are four energy outputs from the plaque. First is
the energy lost during metabolic processes of contained
organisms. The second and largest energy output is in
the production of metabolites. These are generally small
molecules such as lactic, formic, and acetic acids that
provide some residual energy content that the largely
anaerobic plaque community is unable to metabolize.
The deepest cells in the plaque may be literally starved
to death and thus small amounts of large molecules such

as enzymes, cell wall components, and toxins are released from the plaque. These act as strong immunogens
and can produce potent reactions from the host. The
other two losses of energy include viable cells and extracellular polysaccharides that are mechanically dislodged
from the plaque.
From a clinical viewpoint, the energy output side of
the plaque community is of prime importance. If the
plaque community is producing large amounts of organic acids,
caries will develop subjacent to the plaque. If the output is

largely toxins, proteolytic enzymes, and other antigenic
materials, periodontal disease will result. This output
can be controlled by regulating the input side, the habitat, or the successional stage of the plaque community.
Sulcular Fluid. In the early stages of gingival inflammation, a serous exudate is produced from the sulcular epithelium. This may occur after only 2 to 4 days
of gingival tissue exposure to undisturbed plaque. This
sulcular fluid contains serum proteins such as immunoglobulins, complement, fibrin, and white blood cells.
Immunoglobulins of the IgG class can activate the complement system to produce several very destructive enzymes capable of lysing gram-negative bacteria and inducing phagocytosis of gram-positive bacteria. This
system is therefore capable of very effective control of
many microorganisms and, consequently, represents a
very strong immunologic challenge to bacterial invasion of the sulcular epithelium. Actual invasion of the
epithelium is only seen in acute necrotizing ulcerative
gingivitis. Many organisms reside in the gingival crevice. Over long periods of residence they can produce
destruction of periodontal tissues but do not normally
produce caries. The effects of the immunologic controls
exerted by the sulcular fluid are likely to be limited to
the immediate area of the gingival crevice. Outside the
crevice, the immunoglobulins and other immunologic
defenses are diluted and washed away rapidly by the
saliva.
Saliva. Saliva is the primary means by which the patient (host) exerts control over its oral flora (parasites).
The normal oral flora is beneficial to the host. It must be
recognized that the oral flora and the host have coevolved to provide a mutually satisfactory relationship.
The fact that many normal residents of the oral flora do
not occur naturally in any other place is strong evidence
of this evolution. A parasite that rapidly destroys its
host is not likely to have long-term success! However,
the host can derive benefits from the parasite if that parasite occupies a niche that would otherwise be available
to a more damaging parasite. The apparent result of
long-term coevolution is a system in which the host cultivates a limited and specialized oral flora that, in turn,
protects the host from many potential pathogens that
pass through the oral cavity. The dependent relationship of the resident oral flora is demonstrated by its ability to subsist entirely on nutrients available in saliva,

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

whereas nonresident organisms are strongly inhibited
by the many antimicrobial components of saliva. Many
medications are capable of reducing salivary flow and
thus increasing caries risk (Table 3-4). This importance
of saliva in the maintenance of the normal oral flora is
dramatically illustrated by observing changes in the
oral flora following therapeutic radiation to the head
and neck. After radiation, the salivary glands become fibrotic and produce little or no saliva, giving the patient
an extremely dry mouth, a condition termed xerostomia
(xero, dry; stoma, mouth). Such patients may experience near total destruction of the teeth in just a few
months following radiation treatment.
Salivary protective mechanismS that maintain the
normal oral flora and tooth surface integrity include
bacterial clearance, direct antibacterial activity, buffers,
and remineralization.
Bacterial clearance. Secretions from the various salivary glands pool in the mouth to form whole or mixed
saliva. The amount of saliva secreted varies greatly over
ti me. Once secreted, saliva remains in the mouth for a
short period before being swallowed. While in the
mouth, saliva lubricates the oral tissues and bathes both
the teeth and the plaque. The secretion rate of saliva
may have a bearing on caries susceptibility and calculus
formation. Adults produce 1 to 1.5 L of saliva a day, very
little of which occurs during sleep. The flushing effect of
this salivary flow is, by itself, adequate to remove virtually all microorganisms not adherent to an oral surface.
The flushing is most effective during mastication or oral
stimulation, both of which produce large volumes of
saliva. Large volumes of saliva also can dilute and buffer plaque acids.
Direct antibacterial activity. Potential pathogens
are continually introduced to the oral cavity from food,
hands, eating utensils, or virtually anything placed in

Medications That Can Reduce
Salivary Flow

the mouth. Upon entry into the oral cavity, these organisms must first resist being washed away by the saliva.
If they encounter oral surfaces, they usually find them
either coated with toxic enzymes or already occupied by
other organisms. Even if the new organism can survive
the initial defenses and establish some adhesion to a
tooth surface, it must then compete with the other oral
flora organisms for nutrients. Because the normal resident oral flora is well adapted to the oral conditions and
is extremely competitive, a new organism cannot successfully compete unless it is introduced in very large
numbers.
Salivary glands produce an impressive array of antimicrobial products (see Table 3-3). For example, lysozyme, lactoperoxidase, lactoferrin, and agglutinins possess antibacterial activity. These salivary proteins are not
part of the immune system but are part of an overall protection scheme for mucous membranes that occurs in
addition to immunologic control. These protective proteins are present continuously at relatively uniform levels, have a broad spectrum of activity, and do not possess the "memory" of immunologic mechanisms. The
normal resident oral flora apparently has developed resistance to most of these antibacterial mechanisms.
Although the antibacterial proteins in saliva play an
important role in protection of the soft tissues in the oral
cavity from infection by pathogens, they have little effect on caries because similar levels of antibacterial proteins can be found in both caries-active and caries-free
individuals. This suggests that caries susceptibility in
healthy individuals is not related to saliva composition.
However, individuals with decreased salivary production
(due to illness, medication, or irradiation) may have significantly higher caries susceptibility (see Table 3-4).
Buffers. The volume and buffering capacity of saliva
available to tooth surfaces have major roles in caries
protection. The buffering capacity of saliva is primarily
determined by the concentration of bicarbonate ion.
Buffering capacity can be estimated by titration methods and may be a useful method for assessment of
saliva in caries-active patients. The benefit of the buffering is to reduce the potential for acid formation.
In addition to buffers, saliva contains molecules that
contribute to increasing plaque pH. These include urea
and sialin, which is a tetrapeptide that contains lysine
and arginine. Hydrolysis of either of these basic compounds results in production of ammonia, causing the
pH to rise.
Because saliva is very important in controlling both
the oral flora and the mineral content of the teeth, salivary testing should be done on patients with high caries
activity. A portion of the salivary sample also may be
used for bacteriologic testing.
Remineralization. Saliva and plaque fluid are supersaturated with calcium and phosphate ions. Without a
means to control precipitation of these ions, the teeth

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

would become literally encrusted with mineral deposits. Fortunately, saliva contains statherin, a prolinerich peptide capable of stabilizing calcium and phosphate ions and thus prevents excessive deposition of
these ions on the teeth . 33 This supersaturated state of the
saliva provides constant opportunity for remineralizing
enamel and thus can help protect the teeth in times of
cariogenic challenges.
When the local pH is high enough (above 5.5) and calcium and phosphate ions are present, the demineralization of the carious process may be reversed by remineralization of the damaged enamel tooth structure. If it
occurs before cavitation, the surface of the tooth may
show evidence of the carious episode by the presence of
discoloration (usually brownish) resulting from incorporation of exogenous pigmented material. If remineralization occurs after cavitation, the remaining exposed
surface becomes harder and often becomes dark brown
or black in color. Either surface is termed arrested caries
and is often more resistant to future cariogenic challenge. If caries becomes arrested on a dentinal surface, it
is referred to as eburnated dentin (see Figs. 9-15, C [bs]
and 9-20).
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF CARIES
Caries causes damage by demineralization and dissolution of tooth structure, resulting from (1) a highly localized drop in the pH at the plaque-tooth interface and
(2) tooth demineralization. The local pH drop occurs as
the result of plaque metabolism (see Fig. 3-16), but only
plaque communities with high concentrations of MS
and lactobacilli can produce a sufficiently low pH to
cause demineralization of teeth. A single exposure of sucrose solution to a cariogenic plaque results in rapid metabolism of the nutrients to organic acids. The organic
acids (primarily lactic acid) dissociate to lower the local
pH (see Fig. 3-16). Single events of lowered pH are not
sufficient to produce significant changes in the mineral
content of the surfaces of the teeth. However, many
episodes of long-duration demineralization (lowered
pH), occurring over long periods of time, will produce
the characteristic lesions of caries. Frequent sucrose exposure is the single most important factor in maintaining a pH depression at the tooth surface, often resulting
in demineralization.
The output (production) of acid from caries-active
plaques is twice that of caries-inactive plaques per milligram wet weight of plaque . The production of acid
from a caries-active plaque can overcome the buffering
capacity of salivary bicarbonate available at the toothplaque interface, causing the local pH to fall. Once the
pH falls below 5.5, tooth mineral is dissolved. In cariesactive individuals, the pH at the tooth surface remains
below the critical pH (5.5) for 20 to 50 minutes following
a single exposure to sucrose. Thus, it should be noted
that sweet snacks between meals can result in almost
continuous acid attack on the tooth surface.

Below the critical pH (5.5), the tooth mineral acts as
a buffer and loses calcium and phosphate ions into the
plaque. This buffering capacity maintains the local pH
at approximately 5.0, which is responsible for the characteristic histologic form of carious lesions described in
the subsequent section. At lower pH values, such as 3.0
or 4.0, the surface of enamel is etched and roughened.
At a pH of 5.0, the surface remains intact while the subsurface mineral is lost. This initial carious lesion limited
to the enamel is incipient caries and is characterized by
a virtually intact surface, but a porous subsurface. The
intact surface and subsurface porosity are responsible for
the clinical characteristics of incipient lesions: smooth intact surfaces that become chalky white opacities when
dried. When the porous body of an incipient lesion is
hydrated, the lesion is not detectable clinically because
the porous area remains translucent. But desiccation
(drying) of the tooth with a stream of compressed air
removes the subsurface water, leaving air-filled voids
that render the area opaque and white. Incipient lesions
may be reversed by remineralization, restoring the enamel to
a sound state. When fluoride ion is part of the remineralization process, the enamel will not only be restored to soundness but also will have increased resistance to further caries
attacks.

The intact surface over incipient lesions is critical to
the process of potential remineralization because it protects the etched hydroxyapatite crystals in the enamel
from being coated by salivary proteins. The etched crystal lattice remains open and can readily precipitate more
hydroxyapatite when the local environmental conditions change and calcium and phosphate ions are provided to the area from saliva. Cavitation of the surface
occurs when the subsurface demineralization is so extensive that the tooth structure surface collapses. Cavitation of enamel is not reversible and is usually associated
with an acceleration in the process of carious destruction
of the tooth. It occurs when a series of demineralization
(pH drop) and remineralization (salivary ions) episodes
are dominated by the demineralization process.
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS
OF THE LESION
A plaque community of sufficient mass (thickness) to
become anaerobic at the tooth surface has the potential
to be cariogenic. A large population of MS virtually assures this occurrence. A sucrose-rich diet gives a selective advantage to MS and allows the organism to accumulate in large numbers in the plaque community. The
sucrose-rich environment also allows MS to produce
large quantities of extracellular polysaccharides (dextrans and insoluble mutans). These form a gelatinous
material that produces a diffusion-limiting barrier in the
plaque. The combination of limited diffusion and tremendous metabolic activity makes the local environment anaerobic and very acidic and, thus, an ideal environment for dissolution of the subjacent tooth surface.

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

Once the tooth surface becomes cavitated, a more retentive surface area is available to the plaque community This allows filamentous bacteria that have poor
adhesion abilities, such as lactobacilli, to become established in the lesion. In the absence of change in the
host's diet and oral hygiene practices, the cavitation of
the tooth surface produces a synergistic acceleration of
the growth of the cariogenic plaque community and expansion of the cavitation. This results in a rapid and
progressive destruction of tooth structure. Once enamel
caries penetrates to the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ),
rapid lateral expansion of the carious lesion takes place
because dentin is much less resistant to caries attack.
This sheltered, highly acidic, and anaerobic environment provides an ideal niche for lactobacilli, which
were previously thought to be the primary etiologic
agents of caries, but lactobacilli have no ability to adhere to the tooth surface and therefore are unlikely to be
a factor in the initiation of caries. MS are probably the
most important organisms in the initiation of enamel caries,
and A. viscosus is the most likely organism to initiate root
caries. After caries initiation, lactobacilli then become

i mportant residents of the carious lesion, once their
niche is available. Because of their acidogenic potential
and aciduric lifestyle, lactobacilli are probably very important in the progression of dentinal caries.
CLINICAL SITES FOR CARIES INITIATION

The characteristics of a carious lesion vary with the nature of the surface on which the lesion develops. There
are three distinctly different clinical sites for caries initiation: (1) the recesses of developmental pits and fissures
of enamel, which is the most susceptible site; (2) smooth
enamel surfaces that shelter plaque; and (3) the root surface (see Fig. 3-16, A through C).
The second site listed refers to certain areas of the
smooth enamel surface where contour or tooth position
protects (shelters) plaque against the rubbing action of
some foods and often from being loosened by the toothbrush. These include the areas of the contacting proximal surfaces that are gingival to the contact and thereby
highly susceptible to caries because of shelter afforded
to plaque. (Only proper daily application of dental floss
to such surfaces can disrupt the plaque's successional
change.) Plaque on noncontacting proximal surfaces also
may be sheltered because of tooth surface contour or
position (e.g., the distal surface of the most posterior
tooth). Other susceptible smooth enamel surfaces are
those areas gingival to the height of contour of the facial
and lingual surfaces where, again, the plaque is sheltered from the rubbing of food and often, as well, from
the toothbrush because of improper brushing technique
(see the later section, Oral Hygiene, for a discussion of
flossing and brushing).
Each of these areas has distinct surface topography
and environmental conditions. Consequently, each area
has a distinct plaque population. The diagnosis, treat-

ment, and prevention of these different lesion types
should take into account the different etiologic factors
operating at each site.
Pits and Fissures. The pits and fissures of newly
erupted teeth are rapidly colonized by bacteria. These
early colonizers form a "bacterial plug" that remains in
the site for a long time, perhaps even the life of the
tooth. The type and nature of the organisms prevalent
in the oral cavity determine the type of organisms colonizing the pits and fissures and therefore are instrumental in determining the outcome of the colonization.
There are large variations in the microflora found in
pits and fissures, suggesting that each site can be considered a separate ecologic system. Large numbers of
gram-positive cocci, especially S. sanguis, are found in
the pits and fissures of newly erupted teeth, whereas
large numbers of MS are usually found in carious pits
and fissures.
The shape of the pits and fissures contributes to their
high susceptibility to caries. The long narrow orifice prevents visual and tactile examination (see Fig. 3-17). There
is considerable morphologic variation in these structures. Some pits and fissures end blindly, others open
near the dentin, and others penetrate entirely through
the enamel.
Pit-and-fissure caries expands as it penetrates into the
enamel. Thus, the entry site may appear much smaller
than the actual lesion, making clinical diagnosis difficult. Carious lesions of pits and fissures develop from
attack on their walls (see Fig. 3-18, A through C). The
progress of dissolution of the walls of a pit-or-fissure lesion is similar in principle to that of the smooth-surface
lesion because there is a wide area of surface attack extending inward, paralleling the enamel rods. The occlusal enamel rods bend down and terminate on the
dentin immediately below the developmental enamel
fault. Thus a lesion originating in a pit or fissure affects a
greater area of the DEJ than does a comparable smoothsurface lesion. In cross-section, the gross appearance of
a pit-and-fissure lesion is an inverted V with a narrow
entrance and a progressively wider area of involvement
closer to the DEJ (see Fig. 3-18, D).
Smooth Enamel Surfaces. The smooth enamel surfaces of the teeth present a less favorable site for plaque
attachment. Plaque usually develops only on those
smooth surfaces that are near the gingiva or are under
proximal contacts. The proximal surfaces are particularly susceptible to caries because of the extra shelter
provided to resident plaque due to the proximal contact area immediately occlusal to the plaque. Lesions
starting on smooth enamel surfaces have a broad area of
origin and a conical, or pointed, extension toward the
DEJ. The path of ingress of the lesion is roughly parallel to the long axes of the enamel rods in the region. A
cross-section of the enamel portion of a smooth surface lesion shows a V shape with a wide area of origin
and the apex of the V directed toward the DEJ. After

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

caries penetrates the dentinoenamel junction, softening of the dentin spreads rapidly laterally and pulpally
(see Fig. 3-24).
Root Surface. The root surface is rougher than
enamel and readily allows plaque formation in the absence of good oral hygiene. The cementum covering the
root surface is extremely thin and provides little resistance to caries attack. Root caries lesions have less welldefined margins, tend to be U-shaped in cross-section,
and progress more rapidly because of the lack of protection from an enamel covering. In recent years, the prevalence of root caries has significantly increased because of
the increasing number of older persons who retain more
teeth, experience gingival recession, and usually have
cariogenic plaque on the exposed root surfaces.

PROGRESSION OF CARIOUS LESIONS
The progression and morphology of the carious lesion is
variable, depending on the site of origin and the conditions in the mouth (see Figs. 3-16, 3-18, and 3-24). The
time for progression from incipient caries to clinical caries
(cavitation) on smooth surfaces is estimated to be 18 months,
plus or minus 6 months . 63 Peak rates for the incidence of
new lesions occurs 3 years after the eruption of the tooth.
Occlusal pit-and-fissure lesions develop in less time than
smooth-surface caries. Both poor oral hygiene and frequent exposures to sucrose-containing food can produce
incipient (white spot) lesions (first clinical evidence of
demineralization) in as little as 3 weeks. Radiationinduced xerostomia (dry mouth) can lead to clinical
caries development in as little as 3 months from the onset of the radiation. Thus, caries development in healthy
individuals is usually slow in comparison to the rate
possible in compromised persons.

HISTOPATHOLOGY OF CARIES

ENAMEL CARIES
Histology of Enamel. Enamel is composed of very
tightly packed hydroxyapatite crystallites, organized
into long columnar rods (prisms). The rods are somewhat
key-shaped in cross-section as described in Chapter 2.
Individual enamel rods are formed by the activity of
ameloblasts. Each rod starts at the DEJ and extends as a
wavy, continuous column to the surface of the crown.
The mineralization process is apparently somewhat discontinuous and is characterized by alternating phases of
high and low activity. Periods of low activity create "rest"
lines within the rods. These rest lines, in combination
with similar lines in neighboring rods, form a structure
visible in mounted cross-sections of enamel and are named
the striae of Retzius. The striae are regions characterized
by relatively higher organic content (see Fig. 3-6, B). Both
the striae and the inherent spaces in prism boundaries
provide sufficient porosity to allow movement of water
and small ions, such as hydrogen ions. Thus enamel is capable of acting as a molecular sieve by allowing free
movement of small molecules and blocking the passage
of larger molecules and ions. The sievelike behavior of
enamel also explains why even incipient caries of enamel
can produce a pulpal response before penetration of bacteria. The movement of ions through carious enamel can
result in acid dissolution of the underlying dentin before
actual cavitation of the enamel surface. This acid attack
at the external ends of the dentinal tubules initiates a
pulpal response by unknown mechanisms. Because the
striae form horizontal lines of greater permeability in the
enamel, they probably contribute to the lateral spread of
smooth surface lesions. The decreased mineral content of
the striae in incipient lesions is illustrated in Figs. 3-26

FIG . 3-26 Cross-section of small carious lesion in enamel examined in quinoline by transmitted
li ght (x 100). Surface (a) appears to be intact. Body of lesion (b) shows enhancement of striae of
Retzius. Dark zone (c) surrounds body of lesion while translucent zone (d) i s evident over entire
advancing front of lesion. (From Silverstone LM. In Silverstone LM et al, editors: Dental caries,
London and Basingstoke, 1981, Macmillan.)

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

and 3-27. Indeed, the striae appear to be accentuated in
early lesions. In the occlusal enamel, the striae of Retzius
and the enamel rod directions are mutually perpendicular. On the axial surfaces of the crown, the striae course
diagonally and terminate on the surface as slight depressions. The surface manifestations of the striae are the
i mbrication lines of Pickerel that lie between the perikymata ridges (see Fig. 3-7). Caries preferentially attacks
the cores of the rods and the more permeable striae of
Retzius, which promotes lateral spreading and undermining of the adjacent enamel.
Clinical Characteristics of Enamel Caries: the Incipient Smooth-Surface Lesion. Caries-prone patients

usually have extensive deposits of plaque on the teeth,
which must be removed before clinical examination. On
clean, dry teeth, the earliest evidence of caries on the
smooth enamel surface of a crown is a white spot (see
Figs. 3-1, 3-2, 3-25, and 9-6, D). These lesions are usually
observed on the facial and lingual surfaces of the teeth.
White spots are chalky white, opaque areas that are re-

FIG 3-27

Microradiograph (X150) of cross-section of small
carious lesion in enamel. Well-mineralized surface (s) is evident. Alternating radiolucent and radiopaque lines indicate
demineralization between enamel rods. (From Silverstone LM.
In Silverstone LM et al, editors: Dental caries, London and Basingstoke, 1981, Macmillan.)

vealed only when the tooth surface is desiccated, and
are termed incipient caries. These areas of enamel lose
their translucency because of the extensive subsurface
porosity caused by demineralization. Care must be exercised to distinguish white spots of incipient caries
from developmental white spot hypocalcifications of
enamel (see Fig. 9-6). Incipient caries will partially or
totally disappear visually when the enamel is hydrated
(wet), while hypocalcified enamel is relatively unaffected by drying and wetting (Table 3-5). Hypocalcified
enamel does not represent a clinical problem except when
its appearance is objectionable esthetically. The surface
texture of an incipient lesion is unaltered and is undetectable by tactile examination with an explorer. A more
advanced lesion develops a rough surface that is softer
than the unaffected, normal enamel. Softened chalky
enamel that can be chipped away with an explorer is a
sign of active caries. It also should be noted that injudicious use of an explorer tip can cause actual cavitation
for a previously noncavitated incipient area, thus requiring, in most cases, restorative intervention. Similar
incipient lesions occur on the proximal smooth surfaces
but usually are undetectable by visual or judicious tactile (explorer) examination. Incipient lesions sometimes
can be seen on radiographs as a faint radiolucency, limited to the superficial enamel. When a proximal lesion
is clearly visible radiographically, the lesion may have
advanced significantly and histologic alteration of the
underlying dentin probably has already occurred (see
Fig. 3-36).
It has been shown experimentally and clinically that
incipient caries of enamel can remineralize. Tables 3-5
and 3-6 list the characteristics of enamel at various stages
of demineralization. Noncavitated enamel lesions retain
most of the original crystalline framework of the enamel
rods and the etched crystallites serve as nucleating agents
for remineralization. Calcium and phosphate ions from
saliva can then penetrate the enamel surface and precipitate on the highly reactive crystalline surfaces in the
enamel lesion. The supersaturation of the saliva with
calcium and phosphate ions serves as the driving force
for the remineralization process. Both artificial and natural carious lesions of human enamel have been shown
to regress to earlier histologic stages after exposure to
conditions that promote remineralization. Furthermore,
the presence of trace amounts of fluoride ions during

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

this remineralization process greatly enhances the precipitation of calcium and phosphate, resulting in the remineralized enamel becoming more resistant to subsequent caries attack because of the incorporation of more
acid-resistant fluorapatite (see Fig. 3-38). Remineralized
(arrested) lesions can be observed clinically as intact, but
discolored, usually brown or black spots (see Fig. 9-15,
C). The change in color is presumably due to trapped organic debris and metallic ions within the enamel. These
discolored, remineralized, arrested caries areas are intact and are more resistant to subsequent caries attack
than the adjacent unaffected enamel. They should not
be restored unless they are esthetically objectionable.
Zones of Incipient Lesion. Considerable research
has been applied to producing caries-like lesions in simplified laboratory systems . 70,71 The first attempts to produce artificial lesions used strong organic acids. These
failed because the strong acids aggressively attacked the
surface of enamel, producing a damaged surface similar
to that produced by the acid-etch technique now used
for tooth-colored restorations. However, when acidified
gels were used over a very long exposure time (10 to 12
weeks), artificial carious lesions could be produced that
were histologically identical to natural incipient lesions.
The success of this technique illustrates the importance

of the diffusion-limiting nature of plaque described earlier (see Clinical Characteristics of the Lesion). The ability to artificially produce enamel lesions has resulted in
an identification of a detailed description of the early
stages of caries in enamel. Figs. 3-26 and 3-28 illustrate
the four regularly observed zones in a sectioned incipient lesion: (1) the translucent zone, (2) the dark zone,
(3) the body of the lesion, and (4) the surface zone.
Zone 1: Translucent Zone. The deepest zone is the
translucent zone (see Fig. 3-28, C) and represents the advancing front of the enamel lesion. The name refers to
its structureless appearance when perfused with quinoline solution and examined with polarized light. In this
zone, the pores or voids form along the enamel prism
(rod) boundaries, presumably because of the ease of
hydrogen ion penetration during the carious process.
When these boundary area voids are filled with quinoline solution, which has the same refractive index as
enamel, the features of the area disappear. The pore
volume of the translucent zone of enamel caries is 1%,
10 times greater than normal enamel.
Zone 2: Dark Zone. The next deepest zone is known
as the dark zone because it does not transmit polarized
light. This light blockage is caused by the presence of
many tiny pores too small to absorb quinoline. These

FIG . 3-28 A, Cross-section of small carious lesion in enamel examined in quinoline with polari zed light ( X 100). Advancing front of lesion appears as dark band below body of lesion. B, Same
section after exposure to artificial calcifying solution examined in quinoline and polarized light.
Dark zone (DZ) covers much greater area after remineralization has occurred (x100).
C, Schematic diagram of Fig. 3-28, A and B. Left side indicates small extent of zones 1 and
2 before remineralization. Small circles indicate relative sizes of pores in each zone. Right side
i ndicates increase in zone 2, the dark zone, following remineralization. This micropore system
must have been created where previously the pores were much larger. (From Silverstone LM.
In Silverstone LM et al, editors: Dental caries, London and Basingstoke, 1981, Macmillan.)

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

smaller air- or vapor-filled pores make the region opaque.
The total pore volume is 2% to 4%. There is some speculation that the dark zone is not really a stage in the sequence of the breakdown of enamel; rather, the dark
zone may be formed by deposition of ions into an area
previously only containing large pores. It must be remembered that caries is an episodic disease with alternating
phases of demineralization and remineralization. Experimental remineralization has demonstrated increases in the
size of the dark zone at the expense of the body of the
lesion (see Fig. 3-28, C). There is also a loss of crystalline
structure in the dark zone, suggestive of the process of
demineralization and remineralization. The size of the
dark zone is probably an indication of the amount of
remineralization that has recently occurred.
Zone 3: Body of the Lesion. The body of the lesion
is the largest portion of the incipient lesion while in a
demineralizing phase. It has the largest pore volume,
varying from 5% at the periphery to 25% at the center.
The striae of Retzius are well marked in the body of
the lesion, indicating preferential mineral dissolution
along these areas of relatively higher porosity. The first
penetration of caries enters the enamel surface via the
striae of Retzius. The interprismatic areas and these
cross-striations provide access to the rod (prism) cores,
which are then preferentially attacked. Bacteria may be
present in this zone if the pore size is large enough to
permit their entry. Studies using transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) demonstrate the presence of bacteria invading
between the enamel rods (prisms) in the body zone .12,25
Zone 4: Surface Zone. The surface zone is relatively
unaffected by the caries attack. It has a lower pore volume than the body of the lesion (less than 5%) and a radiopacity comparable to unaffected adjacent enamel
(see Fig. 3-27). The surface of normal enamel is hypermineralized by contact with saliva and has a greater
concentration of fluoride ion than the immediately subjacent enamel. It has been hypothesized that hypermineralization and increased fluoride content of the superficial enamel are responsible for the relative immunity
of the enamel surface. However, removal of the hypermineralized surface by polishing fails to prevent the reformation of a typical, well-mineralized surface over the
carious lesion. Thus, the intact surface over incipient
caries is a phenomenon of the caries demineralization
process rather than any special characteristics of the superficial enamel. Nevertheless, the importance of the
intact surface cannot be overemphasized, because it
serves as a barrier to bacterial invasion. As the enamel
lesion progresses, conical-shaped defects in the surface
zone can be seen by SEM. These are probably the first
sites where bacteria can gain entry into a carious lesion.
Arresting the caries process at this stage results in a
hard surface that may at times be rough, though cleanable (see Fig. 9-20, C).

DENTINAL CARIES

Histology of Dentin. Dentin is the hard portion of
the tooth that is covered by enamel on the crown and
cementum on the root. Dentin is the calcified product of
the odontoblasts that line the inner surface of the dentin
within the periphery of the external pulp tissue. Each
odontoblast has an extension (termed Tomes' fiber in older
texts) into a dentinal tubule. The tubules transverse the
entire thickness of dentin from the pulp to the dentinoenamel junction (Fig. 3-29, A). Filling the space bet ween the tubules is the intertubular dentin, a rigid
bonelike material composed of hydroxyapatite crystals
embedded in a network of collagen fibers. The walls of
the tubules are lined with a smooth layer of mineral
termed peritubular dentin. A thin membrane is always
observed lining the tubule in normal dentin. Controversy remains concerning the nature of this lining membrane: it may be a true plasma membrane of the odontoblast or simply a limiting membrane similar to that
found on the surface of bone .84 The material within the
membrane is odontoblastic cytoplasm if the membrane
is part of the odontoblast, or a plasmalike exudate if the
membrane is not a part of the odontoblast. In either case,
the tubule allows fluid movement and ion transport necessary for remineralization of intertubular dentin, apposition of peritubular dentin, and/or perception of pain.
The dentin and the pulp are morphologically and embryologically a single unit. Teeth are formed early during development of the mandible and maxilla. A sheet
of epithelial tissue grows inward and condenses with the
underlying mesenchymal tissue in the developing jaws.
This condensed ball of cells, called the dental papilla, differentiates to form dentin- and enamel-forming tissues.
The surrounding epithelial cells form the enamel organ
by differentiating into ameloblasts. On the inside of the
bell-shaped tooth bud, the mesenchymal cells immediately adjacent to the developing ameloblasts transform
into odontoblasts. The two tissues, dentin and enamel,
grow away from their original junction zone to form the
structure of the tooth. The DEJ is the remnant of the bell
stage of the tooth bud. The odontoblasts lay down dentin and move toward the center of the tooth, while the
ameloblasts lay down enamel and move outward, away
from the tooth bud center. In the process of dentinogenesis (formation of dentin), the odontoblasts' cell bodies
are pushed further and further inward. As they move
inward, they leave a tubule behind. Thus each odontoblast is a pulp cell that is associated with a tubule extending to the external periphery of the dentin. Because
of the intimate relationship between the odontoblasts
and the dentin, the pulp and the dentin should be regarded as a single functional unit. More detail of the histology of dentin was presented in Chapter 2.
Clinical and Histologic Characteristics of Dentinal
Caries, Acid Levels, and Reparative Responses. Progression of caries in dentin is different from progression

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

FIG 3-29 Normal and carious dentin. Normal dentin (A) has characteristic tubules that follow a
wavy path from the external surface of the dentin, below the enamel or cementum, to the inner
surface of the dentin in the pulp tissue of the pulp chamber or pulp canal. Dentin is formed from
the external surface and grows inward. As the dentin grows, the odontoblasts become increasi ngly compressed in the shrinking pulp chamber and the number of associated tubules becomes
more concentrated per unit area. The more recently formed dentin near the pulp (a) has both
l arge tubules with little or no peritubular dentin and calcified intertubular dentin filled with coll agen fibers. The older dentin, closer to the external surface (b), is characterized by smaller, more
widely separated tubules and a greater mineral content in the intertubular dentin. The older
dentin tubules are lined by a uniform layer of mineral termed peritubular dentin. These changes
occur gradually from the inner surface to the external surface of the dentin. Horizontal lines indicate predentin; diagonal lines indicate increasing density of minerals; darker horizontal lines
i ndicate densely mineralized dentin and increased thickness of peritubular dentin. The transition
i n mineral content is gradual as indicated in Fig. 3-28. Carious dentin (B) undergoes several
changes. The most superficial infected zone of carious dentin (3) is characterized by bacteria filli ng the tubules, and granular material in the intertubular space. The granular material contains
very little mineral and lacks characteristic cross-banding of collagen. Pulpal to (below) the infected
dentin is a zone where the dentin appears transparent in mounted whole specimens. This zone
(2) is affected (not infected) carious dentin and is characterized by loss of mineral in the intertubular and peritubular dentin. Many crystals can be detected in the lumen of the tubules in this
zone. The crystals in the tubule lumen render the refractive index of the lumen similar to that of
the intertubular dentin, making the zone transparent. Normal dentin (1) is found pulpal to (below)
the transparent dentin.

in the overlying enamel because of the structural differences of dentin (Figs. 3-29 to 3-32). Dentin contains much
less mineral and possesses microscopic tubules that provide a pathway for the ingress of acids and egress of
mineral. The dentinoenamel junction has the least resistance to caries attack and allows rapid lateral spreading
once caries has penetrated the enamel (see Figs. 3-18 and
3-24). Because of these characteristics, dentinal caries is
V-shaped in cross-section with a wide base at the DEJ

and the apex directed pulpally. Caries advances more
rapidly in dentin than in enamel because dentin provides much less resistance to acid attack because of less
mineralized content. Caries produces a variety of responses in dentin, including pain, demineralization,
and remineralization.
Often, pain is not reported even when caries invades
dentin, except when deep lesions bring the bacterial infection close to the pulp. Episodes of short duration

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

FIG.3-30 Cross-section of demineralized specimen of advanced caries in dentin. Reparative dentin (A) can be seen adj acent to most advanced portion of lesion. (From Boyle P:
Kornfeld's histopathology of the teeth and their surrounding
structures, Philadelphia, 1955, Lea & Febiger.)

FIG 3-31

Rampant caries in 10-year-old boy.

pain may be felt occasionally during earlier stages of
dentin caries. These pains are due to stimulation of pulp
tissue by movement of fluid through dentinal tubules
that have been opened to the oral environment by cavitation. Once bacterial invasion of the dentin is close to
the pulp, toxins and possibly even a few bacteria enter
the pulp, resulting in inflammation of the pulpal tissues.
Initial pulpal inflammation is thought to be evident clinically by production of sharp pains, with each pain lingering only a few seconds (10 or less) in response to a
thermal stimulus. A short, painful response to cold suggests reversible pulpitis or pulpal hyperemia. Reversible
pulpitis, as the name implies, is a limited inflammation
of the pulp from which the tooth can recover if the
caries producing the irritation is eliminated by timely
operative treatment. When the pulp becomes more severely inflamed, a thermal stimulus will produce pain
that continues after termination of the stimulus, typi-

cally longer than 10 seconds. This clinical pattern suggests irreversible pulpitis, when the pulp is unlikely to recover after removing the caries. Pulp extirpation and
root canal filling usually are necessary in addition to the
restorative treatment in order to save the tooth. Throbbing, continuous pain suggests partial or total pulp
necrosis that is treated only by root canal therapy or extraction. Although these clinical characteristics are useful as guidelines for pulp treatment, it is emphasized
that pulp symptoms can vary widely and are not always
predictive of the histologic status of the tooth pulp. (See
Chapter 9 for more details regarding pulpal diagnosis.)
The pulp-dentin complex reacts to caries attacks by attempting to initiate remineralization and blocking off the
open tubules. These reactions result from odontoblastic
activity and the physical process of demineralization
and remineralization. Three levels of dentinal reaction
to caries can be recognized: (1) reaction to a long-term,
low-level acid demineralization associated with a slowly
advancing lesion; (2) reaction to a moderate-intensity
attack; and (3) reaction to severe, rapidly advancing caries characterized by very high acid levels. The dentin
can react defensively (by repair) to low- and moderateintensity caries attacks as long as the pulp remains vital
and has an adequate blood circulation.
In slowly advancing caries, a vital pulp can repair
demineralized dentin by remineralization of the intertubular dentin and by apposition of peritubular dentin.
Early stages of caries or mild caries attacks produce
long-term, low-level acid demineralization of dentin.
Direct exposure of the pulp tissue to microorganisms is
not a prerequisite for an inflammatory response. Toxins
and other metabolic by-products, especially hydrogen
ion, can penetrate via the dentinal tubules to the pulp.
Even when the lesion is limited to the enamel,8,13 the
pulp can be shown to respond with inflammatory cells.
Dentin responds to the stimulus of its first caries demineralization episode by deposition of crystalline
material in both the lumen of the tubules and the intertubular dentin of affected dentin in front of the advancing infected dentin portion of the lesion (see Fig. 3-29,
B). Hypermineralized areas may be seen on radiographs
as zones of increased radiopacity (often S-shaped following the course of the tubules) ahead of the advancing, infected portion of the lesion. This repair only
occurs if the tooth pulp is vital.
Dentin that has more mineral content than normal
dentin is termed sclerotic dentin. Sclerotic dentin formation occurs ahead of the demineralization front of a
slowly advancing lesion and may be seen under an old
restoration. Sclerotic dentin is usually shiny and more
darkly colored, but feels hard to the explorer tip. By
comparison, normal freshly cut dentin lacks a shiny, reflective surface and allows some penetration from a
sharp explorer tip. The apparent function of sclerotic
dentin is to wall off a lesion by blocking (sealing) the

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

FIG 3-32 Schematic illustration of the relationship of dentin hardness, crystal deposition, and
condition of the odontoblastic process. According to Fusayama and coworkers, the odontoblastic process extends into the turbid layer but disappears before the advancing front of the
bacterial invasion. Crystals are deposited in the lumen in the transparent layer and the subtransparent layer. The area of crystal deposition corresponds to the area of damage to the odontoblast process membrane. For orientation of layers on tooth, see Fig. 3-33. (Courtesy of
Dr. T. Fusayama. Copyright Ishiyaku EuroAmerica, Inc. Tokyo, 1993.)

tubules. The permeability of sclerotic dentin is greatly
reduced in comparison to normal dentin because of the
decrease in the tubule lumen diameter . 64 Therefore it
may be more difficult to bond a restorative material to
sclerotic dentin.
Crystalline precipitates form in the lumen of the dentinal tubules in the advancing front of a demineralization zone (affected dentin). Once these affected tubules
become completely occluded by the mineral precipitate,
they appear clear when a section of the tooth is evaluated. This portion of dentin has been termed the transparent zone of dentin (see next section, Zones of Dentinal Caries) and, again, is the result of both mineral loss
in the intertubular dentin and precipitation of this mineral in the tubule lumen. Consequently, translucent
dentin is softer than normal dentin (Fig. 3-33). 6 °
The second level of dentinal response is to moderate
intensity (or intermediate) irritants. More intense caries
activity results in bacterial invasion of the dentin. The infected dentin contains a wide variety of pathogenic materials or irritants, including high acid levels, hydrolytic
enzymes, bacteria, and bacterial cellular debris. These
materials can cause the degeneration and death of the
odontoblasts and their tubular extensions below the lesion, as well as a mild inflammation of the pulp. Groups
of these dead, empty tubules are termed dead tracts. The
pulp may be irritated sufficiently from high acid levels
or bacterial enzyme production to cause the formation
(from undifferentiated mesenchymal cells) of replacement odontoblasts (secondary odontoblasts). These cells
produce reparative dentin (reactionary dentin) on the af-

FIG 3-33 Cross-section

of occlusal caries. The occlusal
enamel appears intact, with a small opening in the occlusal fissure. The enamel is darkened where it is undermined by demineralization. The surface of the enamel is unaffected. The
l esion is filled with a bacterial plug containing high numbers
of MS and lactobacilli. The dentin is infected below the plug.
The deeper dentin is not infected but is extensively demineralized. Reparative dentin is being formed below the lesion.

fected portion of the pulp chamber wall (see Fig. 3-29, B
and 3-33). This dentin is different from the normal dentinal apposition that occurs throughout the life of the
tooth by primary (original) odontoblasts. The structure
of reparative dentin can vary from well-organized tubular dentin (less often) to very irregular atubular dentin
(more often), depending on the severity of the stimulus.
Reparative dentin is a very effective barrier to diffusion
of material through the tubules and is an important step
in the repair of dentin. Severe stimuli also can result in
the formation within the pulp chamber of unattached dentin, termed pulp stones, in addition to reparative dentin.

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

The success of dentinal reparative responses, either
by remineralization of intertubular dentin and apposition of peritubular dentin or by reparative dentin, depends on the severity of the caries attack and the ability of the pulp to respond. The pulpal blood supply
may be the most important limiting factor to the pulpal
responses.
The third level of dentinal response is to severe irritation. Acute, rapidly advancing caries with very high
levels of acid production overpowers dentinal defenses
and results in infection, abscess, and death of the pulp.
In comparison to other oral tissues, the pulp is poorly
tolerant of inflammation. Small, localized infections in
the pulp produce an inflammatory response involving
capillary dilation, local edema, and stagnation of blood
flow. Because the pulp is contained in a sealed chamber
and its blood is supplied through very narrow root
canals, any stagnation of blood flow can result in local
anoxia and necrosis. The local necrosis leads to more inflammation, edema, and stagnation of blood flow in the
immediately adjacent pulp tissue, which then becomes
necrotic in a cascading process that rapidly spreads to
involve the entire pulp.
Maintenance of pulp vitality is dependent on the adequacy
of pulpal blood supply. Recently erupted teeth with large

pulp chambers and short, wide canals with large apical
foramina have a much more favorable prognosis for
surviving pulpal inflammation than fully formed teeth
with small pulp chambers and small apical foramina.
Zones of Dentinal Caries. Caries advancement in
dentin proceeds through three changes: (1) weak organic acids demineralize the dentin; (2) the organic material of the dentin, particularly collagen, degenerates
and dissolves; and (3) the loss of structural integrity is
followed by invasion of bacteria. Five different zones
have been described in carious dentin. The zones are
most clearly distinguished in slowly advancing lesions.
In rapidly progressing caries, the difference between the
zones becomes less distinct.
Zone 1: Normal Dentin. The deepest area is normal
dentin, which has tubules with odontoblastic processes
that are smooth, and no crystals are in the lumens. The
intertubular dentin has normal cross-banded collagen
and normal dense apatite crystals. No bacteria are in the
tubules. Stimulation of the dentin (e.g., by osmotic gradient [from applied sucrose or salt], a bur, a dragging instrument, or desiccation from heat or air), produces a
sharp pain.
Zone 2: Subtransparent Dentin. Next is the subtransparent layer, which is a zone of demineralization of
the intertubular dentin and initial formation of very fine
crystals in the tubule lumen at the advancing front.
Damage to the odontoblastic process is evident; however, no bacteria are found in the zone. Stimulation of
the dentin produces pain, and the dentin is capable of
remineralization.

Zone 3: Transparent Dentin. The transparent layer is
a zone of carious dentin that is softer than normal
dentin and shows further loss of mineral from the intertubular dentin and many large crystals in the lumen
of the dentinal tubules. Stimulation of this region produces pain. No bacteria are present. Although organic
acids attack both the mineral and organic content of the
dentin, the collagen cross-linking remains intact in this
zone. The intact collagen can serve as a template for
remineralization of the intertubular dentin, and thus
this region remains capable of self-repair provided the
pulp remains vital.
Zone 4: Turbid Dentin. Turbid dentin is the zone of
bacterial invasion and is marked by widening and distortion of the dentinal tubules, which are filled with bacteria. There is very little mineral present and the collagen in this zone is irreversibly denatured. The dentin in
this zone will not self-repair. This zone cannot be remineralized and must be removed before restoration.
Zone 5: Infected Dentin. The outermost zone, infected dentin, consists of decomposed dentin that is
teeming with bacteria. There is no recognizable structure to the dentin and collagen and mineral seem to be
absent. Great numbers of bacteria are dispersed in this
granular material. Removal of infected dentin is essential to sound, successful restorative procedures as well
as prevention of spreading the infection.
ADVANCED CARIOUS LESIONS

Increasing demineralization of the body of the enamel
lesion results in the weakening and eventual collapse of
the surface covering. The resulting cavitation provides
an even more protective and retentive habitat for the
cariogenic plaque, thus accelerating the progression of
the lesion. The DEJ provides less resistance to the carious process than either the enamel or the dentin. The resultant lateral spread of the lesion at the DEJ produces
the characteristic second cone of caries activity in the
dentin. Figs. 3-29 to 3-31 and Fig. 3-46 illustrate advanced lesions with infected dentin.
Necrotic dentin is recognized clinically as a wet,
mushy, easily removable mass. This material is structureless or granular in histologic appearance and contains
masses of bacteria. Occasionally, remnants of dentinal
tubules may be seen in histologic preparations. Removal
of the necrotic material uncovers deeper infected dentin
(zone 4, turbid dentin), which appears dry and leathery.
The leathery dentin is easily removed by hand instruments and flakes off in layers parallel to the DEJ.
Microscopic examination of this material reveals distorted dentinal tubules engorged with bacteria. Clefts
coursing perpendicular to the tubules also are seen in
leathery dentin. Apparently these clefts represent the rest
lines formed during the original deposition of the dentin
and are more susceptible to caries attack. Further excavation uncovers harder and harder dentin. If the lesion is

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

progressing slowly, there may be a zone of hard, hypermineralized sclerotic dentin that is the result of remineralization of what formerly was transparent dentin
(zone 3). When sclerotic dentin is encountered, it represents the ideal final excavation depth because it is a natural
barrier that blocks the penetration of toxins and acids.
Removal of the bacterial infection is an essential part
of all operative procedures. Because bacteria never penetrate as far as the advancing front of the lesion, it is not
necessary to remove all the dentin that has been affected
by the caries process. In operative procedures, it is convenient to term dentin as either infected, and thus requires removal, or affected, which does not require removal. Affected dentin is softened, demineralized dentin
that is not yet invaded by bacteria (zones 2 and 3). Infected dentin (zones 4 and 5) is both softened and contaminated with bacteria. It includes the superficial,
granular necrotic tissue and the softened, dry, leathery
dentin. The outer layer (infected dentin) can be selectively stained in vivo by caries detection solutions such
as 1% acid red 52 (acid rhodamine B or food red 106) in
propylene glycol.
This solution stains the irreversibly
denatured collagen in the outer carious layer, but not
the reversibly denatured collagen in the inner carious

C

layer. Using this staining technique clinically may provide a more conservative tooth preparation, because the
boundary between two layers differentiated by this
technique cannot easily be detected tactilely.
In slowly advancing lesions, it is expedient to remove
softened dentin until the readily identifiable zone of
sclerotic dentin is reached. In rapidly advancing lesions
(see Figs. 3-34 and 3-46), there is little clinical evidence
(as determined by texture or color change) to indicate
the extent of the infected dentin. For very deep lesions,
this lack of clinical evidence may result in an excavation that risks pulp exposure. In a tooth with a deep
carious lesion, no history of spontaneous pain, normal
responses to thermal stimuli, and a vital pulp (demonstrated by electric testing), a deliberate, incomplete caries excavation may be indicated. This procedure is
termed indirect pulp capping and is characterized by
placement of a thin layer of calcium hydroxide on the
questionable dentin remaining over the pulp. A direct
pulp cap is the placement of calcium hydroxide directly
on exposed pulpal tissue (a pulpal exposure) and the
surrounding deeply excavated dentinal area. The techniques of indirect and direct pulp capping may stimulate the formation of reparative dentin and are discussed

Dark areas indicate caries

D

FIG . 3-34 Rampant caries in a 21-year-old man. While both occlusal and interproximal lesions
exist in the patient, the progress of the occlusal lesions produced the most tooth destruction.
The potential for developing occlusal lesions could have been reduced by earlier application of
sealants. This extensive amount of caries was the result of the patient's excessive fear of bad
breath. In an attempt to keep his breath smelling fresh, he kept sugar-containing breath mints
i n his mouth most of the day. (Colored areas in B and D indicate caries.)

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

in a later section, Caries Control Restoration. However,
the current use of these techniques is rapidly being replaced with another technique
when root canal therapy is not utilized. This newer concept results in the removal of the coronal, potentially infected area of the
pulpal tissue; placement of a calcium hydroxide material over the excavated pulpal area; and then placement
of a resin-modified glass-ionomer liner over the calcium
hydroxide. Although not yet clear, scientific evidence
seems to support this trend-the pulpal tissue appears
to be disinfected and necrosed by the calcium hydroxide, and the resin-modified glass ionomer appears to
adequately seal the area. Both measures may increase
the success of a pulp-capping procedure.
The restorative procedures involving pulpal therapy
are rapidly changing. An excellent bond and seal against
microleakage can be achieved by acid-etching the dentinal (as well as enamel) walls of the tooth preparation.
This treatment typically is followed by application of a
suitable adhesive. Conventional bases are not required,
except when thermal or mechanical (against pressure)
protection of the pulp is indicated.

MANAGEMENT OF CARIES
The NHANES III of the U.S. population for 1988 to
1994 indicated that 45% of children (aged 5 to 17) had
carious teeth. In adults, almost 94% had evidence of
past or present coronal caries and of those people who
had teeth, approximately 23% had root caries. Thus,
caries will be of major importance for the foreseeable
future.
In managing caries, the objective is to focus on the diagnosis (especially identifying those people at high risk
for caries), preventive measures, and treatment modalities. Caries management must be directed, not at the
tooth level (traditional or surgical treatment), but at the
total patient level (medical model of treatment). It is imperative to understand that restorative treatment does
not cure the carious process. Instead, identifying and
eliminating the causative factors for caries must be the
primary focus, in addition to the restorative repair of
damage caused by caries.
For caries to occur, three factors must be present
simultaneously and in the correct manner. These are:
(1) cariogenic bacteria, (2) a susceptible tooth surface,
and (3) available nutrients to support bacterial growth.
Caries is an infectious disease caused by cariogenic
plaque formation on the tooth that causes demineralization of the tooth (enamel demineralization occurs at
pH of 5.5 or less), sometimes requiring restorative intervention and even extraction. As previously noted, of
the over 300 species of bacteria in the oral cavity, only
some of them, known as mutans streptococci, are cariescausing (cariogenic) organisms. MS are the primary causative agents of initial coronal caries because they (1) adhere to enamel; (2) produce and tolerate acid; (3) thrive

in a sucrose-rich environment; and (4) produce bacteriocins, substances that kill off competing organisms.
Ion transfer continuously occurs at the plaque/
enamel interface. The initial decalcification occurs subsurface and it may be 1 to 2 years before enough decalcification can occur to cause loss of the tooth's surface
integrity (cavitation). Once enamel cavitation has occurred, the underlying dentin has already been affected
by the progression of the destruction, and the lactobacillus organism then becomes the primary agent for
further destruction of the dentin.
As plaque is exposed to nutrients (primarily sucrose),
the plaque metabolism produces acids that cause demineralization of the tooth structure. If the nutrient or
the plaque itself is removed, ions from saliva (sodium,
potassium, or calcium) cause remineralization to occur,
which attempts to restore the ionic component to the
structure. When fluoride is present, it is picked up by
the tooth structure and forms fluoroapatite in the
enamel, which is even more resistant to future demineralization attacks than normal enamel.
Saliva is very important in the carious process. If sugars are the keys to success for cariogenic bacteria, then
saliva is a major block barring those same bacteria. Therefore, adequate salivary functioning is critical in the defense against caries attacks. The protective mechanisms
of saliva include: (1) bacterial clearance, (2) buffering actions, (3) antimicrobial actions, and (4) remineralization.
Bacterial clearance occurs because saliva has large
carbohydrate-protein molecules (glycoproteins) that
cause some bacteria to clump together (agglutinate) and
then be swallowed as part of the normal 1.5 liters of
saliva formed each day. Saliva also contains urea and
other buffers that help dilute any plaque acids.
Saliva's antimicrobial actions occur because of various proteins and antibodies that discourage and even
kill some bacterial growth. These include lysozyme,
lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, and Type A secretory immunoglobins. Likewise, saliva has calcium, phosphate,
potassium, and sometimes fluoride ions available to assist with remineralization.
Lack of saliva significantly increases the rate of
caries development .2' Likewise, reduced salivary flow
results in prolonged pH depression (decreased buffering), decreased antibacterial effects, and decreased
ions for remineralization.
Frequently, the cyclic process of caries requires a long
ti me to cause cavitation. Progression through enamel is
often slow, resulting in a large percentage of enamel lesions that remain unchanged over periods of 3 to 4
years .4 Progression rates through dentin may be comparably slow. Thus the process is lengthy, often providing
the opportunity to attempt remineralization efforts that
may keep cavitation from occurring.
Once the carious process is thoroughly understood,
the appropriate diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

caries can occur. The following sections review the factors involved in diagnosing carious lesions and identifying those individuals at high risk for developing carious
lesions; the factors and methods for trying to prevent caries from occurring; and the types of treatment that can be
used for caries, including the caries-control restoration.
CARIES DIAGNOSIS
The process of caries diagnosis involves both risk assessment and the application of diagnostic criteria to
determine the disease state. The primary objectives of
caries diagnosis are to identify those lesions that require surgical (restorative) treatment, those that require nonsurgical
treatment, and those persons who are at high risk for developing carious lesions. Knowing which patients are at high

risk for developing caries provides an opportunity to
implement specific preventive strategies that may prevent caries. These strategies are specific to high-risk individuals and are not intended for all patients (Box 3-1).
For patients at low risk for caries, preventive measures
may be limited to oral hygiene.
To diagnose carious lesions in patients, several factors
must be considered. Some general factors are helpful in
assessing a patient's risk to caries. These include patient
history information and general clinical examination results. The emphasis in diagnosis must shift from detection of cavitations only to the detection of MS presence
and predictions of caries progression (is the patient at
high risk for caries?).
ASSESSMENT TOOLS
Patient History. Knowing certain factors pertaining
to the patient's history can assist in the diagnosis of
caries and identification of high-risk patients. Such factors include age, gender, fluoride exposure, smoking
habits, alcohol intake, medications, dietary habits, eco-

nomic and educational status, and general health. Increased smoking, alcohol consumption, use of medications, and sucrose intake result in increased risks for
caries development. Children and elderly adults have
increased risks, and decreased fluoride exposure, lower
economic status, and lower educational attainment also
increase risk. Poor general health also increases the risk.
However, past caries experience is the best predictor of
future caries activity
Clinical Examination. General information regarding inadequate salivary functioning, plaque accumulation, inflammation of soft tissues, poor oral hygiene,
cavitated lesions, and existing restorations also are instructive in determining potential risk to caries development. The more any of these factors are present, the
greater the risk. Some specific diagnostic factors are also
helpful in assessing risk potential or the presence or absence of carious lesions. Assessing individual tooth surfaces for cavitation is crucial. If cavitation has occurred,
usually restorative intervention is required. However,
examination of tooth surfaces for cavitation must be accomplished judiciously, primarily using visual assessment of discoloration, translucency, or opacity. Injudicious use of sharp dental explorers on noncavitated,
subsurface lesions could cause a cavitation.'
Nutritional Analyses. It must be determined if a dietary analysis should be undertaken. Frequent exposure
to sucrose increases the likelihood of plaque development by the
more cariogenic MS organisms. Although candy is not the

only source of dietary sucrose, it is interesting to note that
number of pounds of candy consumption per person in
the United States increased from 18.4 pounds in 1986 to
20.8 pounds in 1993. 33 Sucrose intake and frequent sucrose exposures have been related to caries activity.
Salivary Analyses. Analyzing saliva may provide
important information about appropriateness of secretion rates and buffering capacity as well as numbers of
both MS and lactobacilli. While bacterial counts may be
helpful in assessing populations, they may not be accurate for an individual patient . 32 However, knowing what
constitutes high values for the numbers of colony forming units (CFU) may be helpful information in identifying high-risk patients.
Radiographic Assessment. Dental radiographs provide useful information in diagnosing carious lesions.
Although radiographs may show caries that is not visible clinically, the minimal depth of a detectable lesion
on a radiograph is about 500 lam. 9 Although radiographs tend to underestimate the histologic extent of a
carious lesion, approximately 60% of teeth with radiographic
proximal lesions in the outer half of dentin are likely to be noncavitated. 63 Thus, many lesions evident radiographically

are not cavitated and should be remineralized rather
than restored. More sensitive techniques are needed for
earlier detection of incipient carious lesions, allowing
the increased usage of remineralizing techniques. New

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

techniques that may become available and useful include
digital radiography, quantitative light-induced fluorescence, electrical conductivity, and ultrasonography.
Detection of carious lesions that require restoration
(those that are cavitated) may be difficult. No single diagnostic technique can reliably detect precavitated carious lesions on all tooth surfaces. However, every effort
should be made to pursue that detection and dentists
should use the methods presented here as needed. Caries detection remains an inexact science, even though
there is greater understanding of the carious process.
Likewise, identification of those patients at high risk to
caries is not clear, but the following factors appear to
contribute to an increased risk of developing new carious lesions: (1) prior caries activity, (2) frequent sucrose
intake, (3) minimal exposure to fluoride, (4) young or
old age, (5) decrease in salivary functioning, (6) high
numbers of cariogenic bacteria, and (7) presence of existing carious lesions.
In the past, caries diagnosis and treatment were limited primarily to the detection and restoration of cavitated lesions. This "drill and fill" approach was simply
symptomatic treatment and failed to deal with the underlying etiologic factors. Undoubtedly, intact, nonrestored teeth are superior to restored teeth. Therefore,
early detection of incipient caries, limitation of caries activity
before significant tooth destruction has occurred, and identification of high-risk patients are primary goals of an effective
diagnosis and treatment program. Because cavitation of the

tooth surface is a late event in the carious process, it is
preceded by a lengthy period of subsurface demineralization that presents the dentist an opportunity to detect
the disease and start preventive measures before the
advent of significant tooth damage. Various diagnostic
methods are available to detect caries activity at early
stages. These include: (1) identification of subsurface demineralization (inspection, radiographic, and dye uptake methods); (2) bacterial testing; and (3) assessment
of environmental conditions such as pH, salivary flow,
and salivary buffering. Because no single test has been
developed that is 100% predictive of later development
of cavitated lesions, a concept of caries risk has been
promoted. Once identified, patients at high risk for
caries can be treated with preventive methods that reduce their likelihood of developing cavitated lesions in
the future .42
If failure to detect caries in its earliest stage (incipient
lesion) occurs, caries is diagnosed by the presence of
cavitation of the tooth surface. The tooth surface is examined visually and tactilely. Visual evidence of caries
includes cavitation, surface roughness, opacification, and
discoloration. Tactile evidence of caries includes roughness and softness of the tooth surface. Roughness and
softening have been determined by judicious probing of
the suspected areas with an explorer. In the past, both
penetration and resistance to removal of an explorer tip

(a "catch") have been interpreted as evidence of demineralization and weakening of tooth structure (a carious lesion). However, the use of an explorer for caries
diagnosis is being replaced by visual and other diagnostic methods because injudicious use of the explorer
tip may cause the actual cavitation in a previously noncavitated incipient area. Likewise, even though radiolucent areas in the proximal surfaces and below the occlusal enamel are interpreted as evidence of caries
(demineralization), they do not indicate whether the
surface has been cavitated.
A single test for caries diagnosis usually cannot be
used alone because such tests may not be sufficient for
accurate caries diagnosis. In particular, the use of the
explorer is an unreliable procedure, because mechanical binding (a "catch") can be caused by factors other
than the presence of caries. The use of only radiographs for caries diagnosis also is unreliable because
of technical difficulties that include exposure, angulation, tooth position, the presence of restorations, and
interpretation bias. Demineralization in enamel that is
visible radiographically may not be indicative of active caries and is not necessarily an indication for
restoration because radiolucency is visible on proximal
enamel surfaces before surface cavitation. Furthermore,
there are differences in caries susceptibility of persons
based on age, geographic origin, ethnic background,
and fluoride exposure. For example, in communities
with fluoridated water supplies, susceptibility to proximal caries is greatly reduced. Therefore multiple criteria must be used, and the diagnostic criteria should
be adjusted according to the patient's overall risks
(age, gender, fluoride exposure history, general health,
and ability to maintain good oral hygiene) (Tables 3-7
to 3-10).

Medical History Factors Associated
With Increased Caries Risk

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

CARIES DIAGNOSIS FOR PITS AND FISSURES

a cavitation! Discoloration of pits and grooves, limited to

Caries cavitation is difficult to detect in pits and fissures
because it is difficult to distinguish from the normal
anatomic form of these features (see Table 3-9). Cavitation at the base of a pit or fissure sometimes can be detected tactilely as softness or by binding of the explorer
tip. However, mechanical binding of an explorer in the
pits or fissures may be due to noncarious causes, such as
the shape of the fissure, sharpness of the explorer, or
force of application. Thus, explorer tip binding is not, by
itself, a sufficient indication to make a caries diagnosis.

the depth of the fissure or pit, is almost a universal finding in normal healthy teeth of adults and, thus, as an
isolated finding is not a sufficient indication for a diagnosis of caries. Because of these confounding factors,
additional criteria have been developed by the U.S.
Public Health Service for pit-and-fissure caries diagnosis. These factors are: (1) softening at the base of the pit
or fissure; (2) opacity surrounding the pit or fissure, indicating undermining or demineralization of the enamel;
and (3) softened enamel that may be flaked away by the
explorer. Actual penetration of the enamel by an ex-

Remember, injudicious use of the explorer may actually cause

Clinical Examination Findings Associated With Increased Caries Risk

Cavitated means that extensive enamel demineralization has lead to destruction of the walls of the pit or fissure and

bacterial invasion has occurred. Demineralization of the underlying dentin is usually extensive by the time the
cavitation has occurred.
Noncavitated (caries-free):
• No radiolucency below occlusal enamel
• Deep grooves may be present
• Superficial staining may be present in grooves
• Mechanical binding of explorer may occur
Cavitated (diseased):
• Chalkiness of enamel on walls and base of pit or fissure
• Softening at the base of a pit or fissure
• Brown-gray discoloration under enamel adjacent to pit or fissure
• Radiolucency below occlusal enamel
*If a cavitated lesion exists in a pit or fissure, it must be restored. If the pit or fissure is not cavitated but at risk, then it should be sealed. The pits
and fissures of molar teeth in children should be sealed routinely as soon as possible after eruption. Pits and fissures in adults should be sealed if
the adult is found to have multiple active lesions or found to be at high risk.

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

plorer tip at the base of a pit or fissure suggests extensive demineralization and weakening of the enamel.
Porous enamel (resulting from demineralization) appears chalky, or opaque, when dried with compressed
air. Once caries penetrates to the dentin, demineralization rapidly spreads laterally through the less-resistant
DEJ. Lateral-spreading caries undermines more enamel
and may be seen clinically as a brown-gray discoloration that radiates away from the pit or fissure. Discolored enamel due to undermining caries is easily distinguished from superficial staining because it is more
diffuse and does not affect the surface of the enamel. On
bitewing radiographs, evidence of dentinal caries may
be seen as a radiolucent area spreading laterally under
the occlusal enamel from a pit or fissure.
CARIES DIAGNOSIS FOR SMOOTH SURFACES
Bitewing radiographs are the most typical method for
evaluation of the proximal smooth surfaces for evidence
of demineralization because these areas usually are not
readily assessed visually or tactilely (see Table 3-10). An
early lesion is detectable radiographically as a localized
decrease in the density of the enamel immediately below the proximal contact, resulting in a radiolucent area
on the radiograph. Proximal radiolucencies detectable on
bitewing radiographs should be examined clinically because
many proximal radiolucencies are not associated with cavitation of the surface and, therefore, are not conclusive evidence
of the need for restorative treatment. A common diagnostic

error concerning proximal caries diagnosis may result
from an extensive superficial enamel incipient lesion
that wraps around the proximal surface and extends
onto the facial and lingual surfaces. Such a lesion produces a well-defined radiolucent area that appears (by
overlapped images) to penetrate through the enamel,
when, in fact, the lesion is only minimally extended into
the enamel (Fig. 3-35).
A proximal incipient enamel lesion detectable as a
faintly visible radiolucency on a bitewing radiograph is
unlikely to have a cavitated surface (Fig. 3-36). Newer
high-speed radiographic film and lower kV exposures
provide a wide range of densities on radiographs that
seem to require greater skill in interpretation than the
older, higher-contrast films. Studies comparing the diagnostic information available from the two film types
show them to be equal .3 One study demonstrated a
small (2%) reduction in ability to detect caries on the
higher-speed film." Many incipient proximal lesions in
healthy patients end up as arrested lesions. Therefore,
restoration of incipient proximal lesions should be delayed to allow time to observe whether or not it progresses. Arrested lesions are routinely found on proximal
surfaces and are visible clinically as slightly discolored,
hard spots in older persons after extraction of an adjacent tooth has occurred (see Fig. 9-15, C). However, since
arrested lesions may have a decreased radiographic density that is not distinguishable from new, active caries,
radiographs cannot be used solely for complete caries

Proximal Caries Treatment Decision-Making"

Noncavitated:
• Surface intact; use of an explorer to judge surface must be done with caution because excessive force can cause
penetration of intact surface over demineralized enamel
• Opacity of proximal enamel may be present
• Radiolucency may be present
• Marginal ridge is not discolored
• Opaque area may be seen in enamel by translumination
Cavitated:
• Surface broken, detectable visually or tactilely; temporary mechanical separation of the teeth may aid diagnosis
• Marginal ridge may be discolored
• Opaque area in dentin on translumination
• Radiolucency is present
*Proximal surfaces are difficult to judge clinically. The critical event in the caries process is surface cavitation. A cavitated surface must be restored,
while a demineralized noncavitated surface can be treated only by antimicrobial and fluoride agents. Bitewing radiographs can reveal a decrease
in density, but radiolucencies alone are not diagnostic of cavitation. Restoration of all radiolucent surfaces results in excessive, unnecessary restorative treatment.

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

FIG 3-35 Example of arrested caries on the mesial surface of a mandibular second molar. The
area below the proximal contact (A and B, mirror view of No. 18) is partly opaque and stained.
Clinically the surface is hard and intact, yet the area is more radiolucent than the enamel above
or below the stain. Caries diagnosis based only on the radiograph (C and D) would lead to a
false-positive diagnosis (i.e., caries present when it is not). The radiolucency is due to the broad
area of subsurface demineralization that extends from the facial to the lingual line angles. The
x-ray beam was directed parallel to the long axis of demineralization and consequently produced a sharply demarked zone of radiolucency in the enamel. This example illustrates the
shortcomings of radiographic diagnosis. Were there not visual access to the mesial surface of
the second molar, it would be very easy to incorrectly diagnose active caries and consequently
restore the tooth.
diagnosis without additional clinical examination and
history.
The overall accuracy (sensitivity [see Chapter 9 for a
discussion of sensitivity and specificity]) of bitewing radiographs to detect caries is estimated to be 40% to
65%.
Combination of different radiographic procedures does not seem to improve the overall sensitivity.
Panoramic radiographic sensitivity for caries is 18%, but
is 41% when combined with bitewing radiographs. This
is low when compared with a full mouth series, which
has an overall sensitivity of 70%. 4o The accuracy of the
diagnosis of healthy surfaces (specificity) is much better,
varying from 98% to 99% from panoramic, bitewing, or
full series radiographs. Thus, when radiolucencies are
absent, the likelihood that caries is absent is high; however, when radiolucencies are present, the increase in
the likelihood of cavitated caries being present is small.
A diagnosis of cavitated caries based only on radiographs is likely to be correct between 4 (less than
chance) and 7 of 10 times. When the surfaces are clear of
radiolucencies, it is highly likely (98 of 100 times) that

these surfaces are caries free. In clinical practice, therefore, the finding of a radiolucency should be followed
by careful clinical assessment of the patient.
It is equally important to detect smooth-surface lesions on facial or lingual surfaces as soon as possible,
because lesions on these surfaces are almost always seen
in individuals with high caries activity. As stated earlier,
incipient caries consists of opaque, chalky white areas
(white spots) that appear when the tooth surface is
dried. The diagnosis is confirmed when the affected
area is rehydrated (wetted) and the chalky area partially
or totally disappears. These incipient lesions have intact
surfaces and care should be given to avoid damaging
the surface with an explorer. The progress of incipient
lesions can be reversed by remineralization when appropriate preventive procedures are instituted. However, once cavitation of the surface has occurred, either
by natural causes or by overzealous application of an
explorer tip, treatment by tooth preparation and restoration is usually advocated. Sometimes, in selected circumstances, slight surfacing/ smoothing of the area by

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

FIG . 3-36 Schematic representation of developmental stages of enamel carious lesion correl ated with radiographic and clinical examination. Cavitation occurs very late in development of
l esion and before cavitation remineralization is possible. (From Darling Al: Brit Dent J 107:287,
1959.)

rotary stone or disc followed by fluoride application
may be sufficient to arrest the lesion. Also acid-etching
and placing an adhesive over the incipient area may seal
it sufficiently to arrest the lesion.
Children and adolescents living in communities lacking fluoridated water will have much higher caries rates
on smooth surfaces than their peers who have the benefit of fluoridated water. While traditional diagnostic
methods for caries should continue to be used for patients living in these nonfluoridated regions, more aggressive treatment with topical fluorides, sealants, and
earlier operative intervention is likely to be needed in
this higher-risk group.
CARIES DIAGNOSIS FOR ROOT SURFACES
Root surfaces exposed to the oral environment, usually
because of gingival recession, are at risk for caries and
should be examined visually and tactilely. Discoloration
of such areas is common and usually is associated with
remineralization. Generally, the darker the discoloration, the greater the remineralization. On the other hand,
active, progressing root caries shows little discoloration
and is primarily detected by the presence of softness
and cavitation.
Root caries may be caused by Actinomyces viscusus, although the microbiology is not fully understood. Be-

cause gingival recession is common in the population,
the potential for root caries is great. The NHANES III
Survey indicated that 46% of elderly adults had recession of 3 mm or greater and 47% of the 65- to 74-yearold group had root caries. For the entire dentate U.S.
adult population, almost 23% had evidence of root
caries. The DFS for root caries for U.S. adults was 1, and
half of those were carious.
Root caries is usually shallow initially, spreads laterally, is light brown to yellow (although white at first),
and without patient symptoms. The lesion development
may be rapid because these areas have no enamel protection and the dentin is less mineralized. However, the
lesion may undergo a maturation phenomenon, resulting in a remineralized area. This is probably due to the
fact that this area of the tooth is exposed to the oral environment and constantly bathed with salivary ions, making the area more resistant to demineralization. Usually,
after exposure of a root surface, if no caries occurs within
several years, it is unlikely that root caries will develop
later unless some major protective element of the patient
is compromised. The arrestment or remineralization of
the root caries lesion is likely because the lesion is initially shallow and therefore easier for ions to penetrate
and strengthen, and dentists tend to watch rather than
restore these areas because no pain usually is associated

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

with the lesion. Presence of fluoride ion decreases root
caries potential. Obviously, the potential for remineralization depends on several factors such as the degree of
sclerosis of the dentinal tubules, degree of bacterial infection, degree of lesion progression, and location of the
lesion.
CARIES ACTIVITY TESTS

Several caries activity tests have been developed to help
detect the presence of oral conditions associated with
increased risk of caries. For individual patients, currently no single caries activity test can predict caries
with a high degree of confidence. Because many of these
tests rely on samples of salivary bacteria, the reliability
of such tests is limited because bacteria that are free
floating in the saliva may not be necessarily representative of the bacteria in plaque. Other tests measure the
plaque index (amount of plaque present) but also are
not sufficient for complete assessment of caries risk. In
his book Caries Risk, Krasse" outlines an assessment

program that not only consists of microbiologic testing
for the presence of MS and lactobacilli, but also is supplemented with analyses of diet and saliva. This combined approach has more promise for accuracy than any
single caries activity test. Individual caries activity tests,
despite their limitations, can be a useful adjunct to the
clinical practitioner by guiding the clinician in making
decisions concerning the need for control measures, the
timing of recall appointments, the types of indicated
restorative procedures and materials, and the determination of a prognosis. The test results also can be used
to motivate patients and to determine patient compliance with treatment regimens.

CARIES PREVENTION
A caries prevention program is a complex process involving multiple interrelated factors (Tables 3-11 and
3-12). The primary goal of a caries prevention program should
be to reduce the numbers of cariogenic bacteria. Prevention
should start with a consideration of the overall resis-

Methods of Caries Treatment by the Medical Model

MS. Mutans streptococci.

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

tance of the patient to infection by the cariogenic bacteria. Although the general health of the patient, fluoride
exposure history, and function of the immune system
and salivary glands have a significant impact on the patient's caries risk, the patient may have little control
over these factors. On the other hand, the patient usually is capable of controlling other factors such as diet,
oral hygiene, use of antimicrobial agents, and dental care
(which may include use of sealants and restorations).
This section presents a variety of factors that may have
an impact on the prevention of caries.
Preventive treatment methods are designed to limit
tooth demineralization caused by cariogenic bacteria,
thereby preventing cavitated lesions. They include:
(1) limiting pathogen growth and metabolism and (2) increasing the resistance of the tooth surface to demineralization. Caries control methods are operative procedures
used both to stop the advance of individual lesions and
to prevent the spread of pathogenic bacteria to other
tooth surfaces, and in this sense, they are preventive procedures. These operative procedures remove irreversibly damaged tooth structure and the associated pathogenic bacteria in the site. Caries control methods are most
effective if all active, cavitated lesions can be treated in
a very short time, even in a single appointment. Control

TABLE 3-12

Treatment Strategies

MS, Mutans streptococci.

procedures also may include pulpal therapy and restoration of the damaged tooth surface to appropriate anatomic contours and function. New restorative treatment
methods have rendered the distinction between preventive and control methods less distinct. Fluoride treatment is capable of rendering tooth surfaces more acidresistant and in some circumstances also may arrest
active caries. Sealants were designed as a preventive
measure, yet studies have shown that deliberately sealing active carious lesions effectively arrests the caries
progress by cutting off the nutrient supply to the pathogenic plaque trapped under the sealant.
Management of dental caries and its consequences remains
the dominant activity of dentists. However, preventive and
diagnostic service percentages of practice activity are increasing. 15 Although these activities relate to a variety of
dental problems, diagnosis and prevention of caries are
major parts of these increases. No longer is restoration
of a carious lesion considered a cure. Rather, the practitioner must identify those patients who have active
carious lesions and those at high risk for caries and institute appropriate preventive and treatment measures.
This section presents some of the measures that can reduce the likelihood of a patient developing carious lesions. Depending on the risk status of the patient, the

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

dentist must decide which of these to institute. Dentistry will focus increasing effort for limiting the need
for restorative treatment.

GENERAL HEALTH
The patient's general health has a significant impact on
overall caries risk. Declining health signals the need for
increased preventive measures, including more frequent
recalls. Every patient has a very effective surveillance
and destruction system for "foreign" bacteria. The effectiveness of a patient's immunologic system is highly dependent on overall health status. Patients undergoing
radiation or chemotherapy treatment have significantly
decreased immunocompetence and are at risk for increased caries.
Medically compromised patients should be examined for changes in the following: plaque index, salivary flow, oral mucosa, gingiva, and teeth. Early signs
of increased risk include increased plaque; puffy, bleeding gingiva; dry mouth with red, glossy mucosa; and
demineralization of the teeth. Decreased saliva flow is
very common during acute and chronic systemic illnesses and is responsible for the dramatic increase in
plaque. Ambulatory patients with chronic illnesses often take multiple medications, which individually or in
combination may significantly reduce salivary flow (see
Table 3-4). The saliva should be tested for both flow and
buffering capacities when changes are detected from an
oral examination.

FLUORIDE EXPOSURE
Fluoride in trace amounts increases the resistance of
tooth structure to demineralization and is therefore a
particularly important consideration for caries prevention (Fig. 3-37). When fluoride is available during cycles
of tooth demineralization, it is a major factor in reduced
caries activity 14 Fluoride appears to be an essential nutrient for humans that is required only in very small
quantities. Laboratory animals fed on a completely
fluoride-free diet develop anemias and reduced reproduction after four generations. When available to humans, fluoride produces spectacular decreases in the

FIG 3-37

White spot lesions of enamel (stage 3 in Fig. 3-36)
may remineralize, remain unchanged, or progress to cavi tated lesions. In this study, done in community with fluoridated public water supply, only 9 of 72 incipient lesions
became cavitated. Over one half of incipient lesions (37 of
72) actually regressed to become indistinguishable from
normal enamel. (From Baker-Dirts O: J Dent Res 45:503,
1966.)

caries rate. The availability of fluoride to reduce caries
risk is primarily achieved by fluoridated community
water systems, but also may occur from fluoride in the
diet, toothpastes, mouthrinses, and professional topical
applications. The optimal fluoride level for public water
supplies is about 1 part per million (ppm). 36 Approximately 62% of the U.S. population (140 million) has
public fluoridated community water systems .24 Public
water fluoridation has been one of the most successful
public health measures instituted in the United States.
For communities that have fluoridated water systems,
the annual cost averages about 50 cents per person. For
every dollar spent on water fluoridation, six dollars of
health savings are realized. At 0.1 ppm and below, the
preventive effect is lost and the caries rate is higher for
such populations lacking sufficient fluoride exposure.
Excessive fluoride exposure (10 ppm or more) results in
fluorosis, a brownish discoloration of enamel, termed
mottled enamel.
Fluorides exert their anticaries effect by three different mechanisms. First, the presence of fluoride ion
greatly enhances the precipitation into tooth structure
of fluorapatite from calcium and phosphate ions present
in saliva. This insoluble precipitate replaces the soluble
salts containing manganese and carbonate that were
lost because of bacterial-mediated demineralization.
This exchange process results in the enamel becoming
more acid-resistant (Fig. 3-38). Second, incipient, noncavitated, carious lesions are remineralized by the same
process. Third, fluoride has antimicrobial activity. In
low concentrations, fluoride ion inhibits the enzymatic
production of glucosyltransferase. Glucosyltransferase
prevents glucose from forming extracellular polysaccharides, and this reduces bacterial adhesion and slows
ecologic succession. Intracellular polysaccharide formation also is inhibited, preventing storage of carbohydrates by limiting microbial metabolism between the
host's meals. Thus, the duration of caries attack is limited to periods during and immediately after eating. In
high concentrations (12,000 ppm) used in topical fluoride treatments, fluoride ion is directly toxic to some oral
microorganisms, including MS. Suppression of growth

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

of MS following a single topical fluoride treatment may
last several weeks . It is possible to greatly lengthen this
suppression by a change in dietary habits (especially
eliminating sucrose) and by the patient's conscientious
application of a good oral hygiene program.
All of the various methods for fluoride exposure
(Table 3-13) are effective to some degree. The clinician's
goal is to choose the most effective combination for each
patient. This choice must be based on the patient's age,
caries experience, general health, and oral hygiene.
Children with developing permanent teeth benefit most
from systemic fluoride treatments via the public water
supply. In regions without adequate fluoride in the
water supply, dietary supplementation of fluoride is indicated for children and sometimes for adults. The

amount of fluoride supplement must be individually determined. This is of particular importance in rural areas
with individual wells because the fluoride content of the
well water can vary greatly over short distances.
Topical application of fluoride should be done semiannually for children and adults who are at high risk
for caries development. The teeth should be cleaned
free of plaque before the application of topical fluorides. Flossing and then tooth brushing are recommended for this purpose. Pumicing the teeth (professional prophylaxis) can remove a considerable amount
of the fluoride-rich surface layer of enamel and therefore can be counterproductive. Acidulated phosphate
fluoride (APF) is the most effective and least objectionable topical agent. APF is available in thixotropic gels

FIG . 3-38

Diagrammatic representation of enamel adaptation reaction. Enamel interacts with its
fluid environment in periods of undersaturation and supersaturation, presented here as periodic
cycles. Undersaturation periods dissolve most soluble mineral at the site of cariogenic attack,
whereas periods of supersaturation deposit most insoluble minerals if their ionic components
are present in immediate fluid environment. As a result, under favorable conditions of remineralization, each cycle could lead toward higher enamel resistance to a subsequent challenge.
(From Koulouirides T. In Menaker L, editor. The biologic basis of dental caries, New York, 1980,
Harper & Row.)

*Caries reduction estimates for topically administered fluorides indicate their effectiveness when used individually. When they are combined with
systemic fluoride treatment, they can provide some additional caries protection.

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

and has a long shelf life. Stannous fluoride (8% F), another option, has a very bitter, metallic taste; may burn
the mucosa; and has a short shelf life. Although the tin
ion in stannous fluoride may be responsible for staining the teeth, it may be beneficial for arresting root
caries. Topical fluoride agents should be applied according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
Self-administered fluoride rinses have an additive effect (about 20% reduction) when used in conjunction
with topical or systemic fluoride treatment. Fluoride
rinses are indicated in high-risk patients and those patients exhibiting a recent increase in caries activity. Two
varieties of fluoride rinses have similar effectiveness:
(1) high dose/low frequency and (2) low dose/high frequency. The high-dose (0.2% F)/low-frequency rinses
are best used in supervised weekly rinsing programs
based in public schools. The low-dose (0.05% F)/highfrequency rinses are best used by individual patients at
home. The high-risk or caries-active patient should be
advised to use the rinse daily. The optimal application
ti me is in the evening. The rinse should be forced between the teeth many times and then expectorated, not
swallowed. Eating and drinking should be avoided after the rinse.
Various fluoride varnishes and gels are available and
are successful in preventing caries. Varnishes provide a
high uptake of the fluoride ion into enamel, yet provide
a lower dosage of fluoride than gels or rinses. These are
professionally applied, yet may provide the most costeffective means of delivery of fluoride to the teeth. They
are effective bacteriocidal and caries prevention agents.
Fluoride varnishes were developed several decades ago
in an attempt to improve fluoride application techniques
and benefits. European countries have widely used fluoride varnishes for the past 20 years. Although the FDA
has approved these materials for use as liners and tooth
desensitizers in the United States, they have not been
approved as anticaries agents. However, "numerous
randomized clinical trials conducted outside the United
States point to the efficacy and safety of fluoride varnishes as a caries-prevention agent."" The general technique for fluoride varnish use is:
1. Clinician applies a thin layer of fluoride varnish directly onto the teeth.
2. Application time is several minutes.
3. Patients are to avoid eating for several hours and
then avoid brushing until the next morning.
Because the fluoride varnish sets when contacting
moisture, thorough isolation of the area is not required.
Furthermore, only toothbrushing, rather than prophylaxis, is necessary before application. The main disadvantage of fluoride varnish is that a temporary change
in tooth color may occur.
The fluoride varnish deposits large amounts of fluoride on an enamel surface, especially on a demineral-

ized enamel surface. Calcium fluoride precipitates on
the surface and often fluorapatite is formed. The high
concentration of surface fluoride also may provide a
reservoir for fluoride, which promotes remineralization. Although additional research on fluoride varnishes is needed, the use of a fluoride varnish as a
caries-preventive agent should be expanded because it
has advantages over other topical fluoride vehicles in
terms of safety, ease of application, and fluoride concentration at the enamel surface.'°
I MMUNIZATION
Bacteria passing through the mouth into the stomach
and intestines come into contact with specialized lymphoid tissue located in Peyer's patches along the intestinal walls. Certain T and B cells in Peyer's patches
become sensitized to the new bacteria. The sensitized T
and B cells migrate through the lymphatic system to the
bloodstream and eventually settle in glandular tissues,
including the salivary glands in the oral cavity. There,
these sensitized cells produce IgA class immunoglobulins that are secreted in the saliva. These IgA antibodies
are capable of agglutination (clumping) of oral bacteria.
This prevents adherence to the teeth and other oral structures, and they are more easily cleared from the mouth
by swallowing. For patients with high concentrations of
MS, agglutinating IgA may have an important anticaries
effect. This immunologic occurrence promotes the possibility of further vaccination against caries. Studies in
rats and primates already have demonstrated the feasibility of such immunization attempts . However, it is
known that the procedure is more effective against
smooth surface lesions than pit-and-fissure lesions.
Even if an anticaries vaccine were developed, concerns remain that may affect its widespread use. First,
potential side effects of a vaccine must be identified.
The safety of such a vaccine has not yet been demonstrated, and, in fact, there are concerns of a possible
cross-reaction with human heart tissue. Second, its cost
must be compared with that of public water fluoridation, which is inexpensive and already very effective at
reducing caries. Vaccination may be no more effective
than fluoride therapy, which has a proven safety record.
However, it may be practical to use a caries vaccine
when public water fluoridation is impractical or in developing third-world countries. Third, limitations imposed by governmental regulatory agencies may affect
the widespread use of an anticaries vaccine.
SALIVARY FUNCTIONING
Saliva is very important in the prevention of caries.
While xerostomia may occur because of aging, it is more
commonly a result of a medical condition or medication.
Lack of saliva greatly increases the incidence of caries. If
a patient is xerostomic, consultation with the physician
may be necessary to identify alternate treatments, if possible, with less salivary impact. Saliva stimulants (gums,

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

paraffin waxes, or saliva substitutes) also may be prescribed for patients with impaired salivary functioning.
A variety of commercial salivary tests are available.
These could aid the practitioner in assessing the production amount and buffering capacity of saliva, as well
as assaying the numbers of microorganisms present.
These results will influence the preventive regimen prescribed for high-risk patients.
ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS

A variety of antimicrobial agents also are available to
help prevent caries (Table 3-14). In rare cases, antibiotics
might be considered, but the systemic effects must be
considered. As already presented, fluoride has antimicrobial effects. Chlorhexidine is showing excellent results. This material was first available in the United
States as a rinse and was first used for periodontal therapy. It was prescribed as a 0.12% rinse for high-risk patients for short-term use. It is used in other countries as
a varnish and the most effective mode of varnish use is
as a professionally applied material . Chlorhexidine varnish enhances remineralization and decreases MS presence. In fact, Emilson" concluded that chlorhexidine
varnishes provide effective reduction in MS.
Chlorhexidine is prescribed for home use at bedtime as a 30-second rinse. Used at this time, when the
salivary flow rate is decreased, the agent has a better
opportunity to interact with MS organisms while tenaciously adhering to oral structures. It is used for approximately 2 weeks, and results in a reduction of MS
counts to below caries potential levels. This decrease
is sustained for 12 to 26 weeks.
The agent also can be applied professionally once a
week for several weeks, monitoring the microbial counts

to determine effectiveness. This may be used in combination with other preventive measures for high-risk
patients.
DIET
Dietary sucrose has two important detrimental effects on

plaque. First, frequent ingestion of foods containing sucrose provides a stronger potential for colonization by
MS, enhancing the caries potential of the plaque. Second,
mature plaque exposed frequently to sucrose rapidly
metabolizes it into organic acids, resulting in a profound
and prolonged drop in plaque pH. Caries activity is most
strongly stimulated by the frequency, rather than the
quantity, of sucrose ingested. The message that excessive
and frequent sucrose intake can cause caries has been
widely disseminated and is well known by lay people.
Despite this knowledge, dietary modification for the
purpose of caries control has failed as a public health
measure. However, for an individual patient, dietary
modification can be effective if the patient is properly
motivated and supervised. Evidence of new caries activity in adolescent and adult patients indicates the need for
dietary counseling. The goals of dietary counseling should be
to identify the sources of sucrose in the diet and reduce the frequency of sucrose ingestion. Minor dietary changes such as

substitution of sugar-free foods for snacks are more
likely to be accepted than more dramatic changes. Rampant (or acute) caries (a rapidly invading infectious process usually involving several teeth) is a sign of gross dietary inadequacy, a complete absence of oral hygiene
practice, or systemic illness. The presence of rampant
caries is an indication of the need for comprehensive patient evaluation. Textbooks on nutrition and medicine
should be consulted.

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

ORAL HYGIENE

Daily removal of
plaque by dental flossing, tooth brushing, and rinsing is
the single best measure for preventing both caries and
periodontal disease (Figs. 3-39 and 3-40). Lbe and others" have established supragingival plaque as the etiologic agent of gingivitis. Long-standing gingivitis can
lead to damage of the epithelial attachment and progression to a more serious periodontal disease. Effective
plaque control by oral hygiene measures results in both
resolution of the gingival inflammation and remineralization of the enamel surface. Pits and fissures are not
accessible to toothbrush bristles because of the small diameter of their orifices, thus these areas are highly susceptible to caries. Obturation of pits and fissures by
sealants is a highly effective method for caries prevention (see Pit-and-Fissure Sealants).
Mechanical plaque removal by brushing and flossing
has the advantage of not eliminating the normal oral
flora. Topical antibiotics, on the other hand, could control plaque, but long-term use predisposes the host to infection by antibiotic-resistant pathogens such as Candida
albicans. Frequent mechanical plaque removal does not
engender the risk of infection of opportunistic organisms. It does change the species composition of plaque in
Plaque free tooth surfaces do not decay!

both the selection for pioneering organisms as well as the
denial of habitat to potential pathogens. Thus, the oral
flora on the teeth of patients with good plaque control
has a high percentage of S. sanguis or S. mitis and is much
less cariogenic than older, mature plaque communities,
which have a significant higher percentage of MS.
Krasse has demonstrated that a combination of oral
hygiene and diet counseling is effective in children. In
this classic study, children in two schools were monitored for lactobacillus levels. The children in one school
were given both feedback about the results of the studies and proper preventive oral hygiene and dietary instruction. After 18 months, the children in the school receiving preventive counseling had an average of 3.3
new restorations, while the control school children who
received no counseling averaged 8.2 new restorations.
This is an excellent demonstration that good oral hygiene and dietary improvements can be effective when
using microbiologic testing as a motivational tool.
Rigid oral hygiene programs should be prescribed
only to high-risk persons with evidence of active disease. Overzealous, universal application of oral hygiene
training programs are frustrating to both dentists and
their patients. High-risk patients should receive intensive oral hygiene training, dietary instruction, and pre-

D
FIG 3-39 Erosion wear and poor homecare leading to caries. A young female patient with severe wear on the facial surfaces of the posterior teeth. This patient was subsequently found to
have a hiatal hernia with frequent regurgitation of stomach acids. Too vigorous brushing and
acid demineralization of the teeth accelerated the loss of tooth structure (A and B). Areas of severe wear (w) exhibit dentin hypersensitivity. The dentin pain was the symptom that caused the
patient to seek dental care. Advising the patient to reduce the vigorous tooth brushing unfortunately resulted in cessation of all brushing. Caries activity rapidly occurred (C and D).

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

ventive dental treatment as necessary to control the progress of the disease. Plaque removal in high-risk patients
should be done frequently. Flossing, brushing, and thorough rinsing after every meal is indicated for this group.
Patients without active disease do not need intensive
intervention in their self-care program. However, they
should still be counseled to optimize their results. Adults
with a low caries experience probably only require flossing, brushing, and rinsing once a day, and the best time
for this is in the evening before going to bed. During
sleep, salivary flow is greatly reduced, limiting the anticaries benefits of saliva and therefore allowing unrestricted plaque metabolism and growth.
Plaque control requires a little dexterity and a lot of
motivation. Some knowledge of tooth contours, embrasure form, proximal contacts, and tooth alignment is
helpful to optimal plaque control. Instruction should include both the selection and use of mechanical aids,
based on the patient's needs. The primary impediment
to patient acceptance of flossing, as a part of routine oral
hygiene procedures, is the difficulty of passing the floss
through tight proximal contacts. Damage to the interproximal papilla and/or tearing or shredding of the
floss are the usual reasons cited by patients for failure to
use this technique.
To prepare for flossing the teeth, lightly wind one end
of a 60-cm length (approximately 2 feet) of ribbon or

Teflon floss twice around the ring finger of the dominant hand, anchoring this end by the second loop overlapping the first. The remaining length of floss is around
the ring finger of the other hand and serves as a spool of
clean floss. The section of floss remaining between the
hands should be approximately 15 cm (6 inches). The
middle 2 to 3 cm (1/2 inch) is held taut between the tips
of the thumbs and first fingers (Fig. 3-41, A).
A braced technique is necessary for passing the floss
through contacts atraumatically. The first finger of the
nondominant hand is used to brace the floss in the facial
embrasure adjacent to the contact to be cleaned (Fig. 3-41,
B). With the floss pressed against the embrasure area, the
free end of the floss is passed diagonally through the contact. A sliding motion helps introduce the floss into the
contact area without sudden uncontrolled movement of
the floss, which might injure the gingiva. Once through
the contact, the floss is wrapped over a proximal surface
and moved up and down to remove the adherent plaque.
The adjacent proximal surfaces must be cleaned individually. Fig. 3-41, C, illustrates cleaning the distal surface
of the approximating pair of teeth. When changing surfaces, damage to the papilla is avoided by gently lifting
the floss to the underside of the contact and moving it
to the adjacent proximal surface. The floss is wrapped
around the opposite (mesial in this example) surface by
pressing distally and moving the floss up and down

B

D
FIG 3-40 A and B, Photograph of the occlusal surfaces of the teeth illustrated in Fig. 3-39,
C. Following cessation of oral hygiene procedures, caries (c) rapidly developed in the exposed
dentin and fissures on the occlusal surfaces. C and D, This was conservatively treated by excavation of the softened dentin and restoration of the excavations and fissures with a highly filled
light-cured composite.

CHAPTER3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

FIG 3-41 Flossing. A, Fingers positioning the floss. B, The braced flossing technique prevents
damage to the interproximal gingiva. The index finger braces the floss in the embrasure while
the other hand presses the floss diagonally through the contact. C, Gentle anterior force wraps
the floss around the distal surface of the more anterior tooth of the contacting pair of teeth. The
floss is moved superiorly and inferiorly over the tooth surface from the inferior side of the contact to the depth of the gingival sulcus.

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

D

E

FIG . 3-41, cont'd
D, The floss is lifted over the papilla and gently positioned posteriorly to wrap
over the mesial surface of the more posterior tooth of the contacting pair. The tooth surface is
cleaned of plaque by the same superior-inferior motion. E, Removing the floss facially through
contact.
Continued

(Fig. 3-41, D). The purpose of routine flossing is not to remove
debris from the interproximal space (although it is ideally
suited for removal of fibrous food caught in contacts), but
rather, it is for the removal of bacterial plaque from proximal
tooth surfaces. The floss can be removed from the interproximal space either by simultaneously pulling both
endsfacially (Fig. 3-41, E) or releasing one end and gently
pulling the length out through the interproximal space.
With experience, satisfactory flossing can be completed in 3 or 4 minutes. Whether to use waxed or unwaxed floss is controversial, although not highly significant. The benefits are from good flossing technique
rather than the choice of floss. Every effort should be
made to encourage good flossing. Gingival bleeding
may occur even with good flossing technique when the
gingiva is inflamed. Patients should be advised that gin-

gival bleeding is a sign of gingival inflammation, not the
result of damage caused by proper flossing or toothbrushing. As good oral hygiene continues, this inflammation will resolve. Within days the gingiva will change
from slightly red and glossy to light pink and stippled.
The healthy gingiva will become "tough" and will no
longer bleed when brushed or flossed.
Each contact can be cleaned with a fresh section of the
floss (Fig. 3-41, F through H) by unwinding the floss
from the spool finger and taking up the increased length
by winding onto the take-up finger. For flossing the distal surface of the most posterior tooth of each quadrant,
it may be necessary to use the tips of the longer, middle fingers (Fig. 3-41, I to K). It is important to floss these
surfaces because they are not easily reached by the
toothbrush.

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

H
FIG. 3-41, cont'd F through H, Passing floss through contact of maxillary central incisors (F) and
flossing the mesial surfaces and mesial transitional angles (G and H).

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

J

FIG

3-41, cont'd I

through K, Floss stretched over tips of longer, middle fingers (I) for flossing
the most posterior distal surfaces (J and K).

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

Flossing is followed by brushing the facial, lingual,
and occlusal surfaces, as well as the most distal surfaces
(Fig. 3-42, A through D). A soft toothbrush with blunttipped nylon bristles is applied to the teeth and gingiva
with vibrating technique (see Fig. 3-42, A and B). A
rapid anterior-posterior sawing motion severely abrades
tooth surfaces and is not effective for interproximal
plaque removal. A small amount of fluoride-containing
dentifrice on the brush is useful for increasing the effectiveness of stain and plaque removal and for treating
the teeth with fluoride.
The sulcular brushing technique is superior to previously advocated methods. The bristles are held at a 45degree angle to the tooth surface and vibrated into the
gingival sulcus and embrasure. The end of the brush can
be applied to the lingual of the anterior teeth (Fig. 3-42,
E) and the noncontacting distal surfaces (see Fig. 3-42,
F). For these surfaces the toothbrush handle must be

FIG . 3-42

raised at a 45-degree angle (or more) to the occlusal
plane. During sulcular brushing, the tips of the bristles
should be forced to enter the gingival sulcus and the
embrasures as far as possible. After brushing the teeth,
gently brush the top (dorsal) surface of the tongue. This
reduces the debris and plaque that otherwise accumulate on this rough surface.
Rinsing follows flossing and brushing. Rinse water is
forced over the teeth by tongue and cheek movements
while the lips are closed. Rinsing should force the water
through the interproximal spaces. Rinsing is repeated
until the expectorated rinse water is clear.
Professional tooth cleaning also has an important efdivided grade
fect on caries reduction One study
school students into three treatment groups: control,
monthly professional cleaning, and twice-a-month professional cleaning. In students with low MS levels, the
once-a-month cleaning group had half as many new

Brushing. A and B, Sulcular-brushing technique for toothbrush applied to facial tooth
surfaces with bristles directed 45 degrees gingivally (same gingival tilt of bristles when on lingual surfaces). Length of double-headed arrows indicates the short extent of vibration of brush
head, causing tips of bristles to enter gingival sulci and facial embrasures (lingual embrasures
when brush applied to lingual surfaces). After several seconds, move brush mesially (or distally)
by one tooth (maintaining same bristle direction) and repeat the vibrating motion at each successive position until all facial and lingual surfaces are brushed. C, Brush applied as depicted in
A and B. D, Sulcular vibrating the bristles on facial surfaces of maxillary posterior teeth.

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

FIG 3-50

Tooth ready for placement of temporary amalgam
restoration. Carious involvement required further extension
than in Fig. 3-49. Liner/bas e material has been applied to
deepest excavated areas, and matrix, appropriately wedged,
has been placed.

If the pulp is penetrated by an instrument during the
operative procedure, then a decision must be made
whether to proceed with root canal therapy or do a direct
pulp cap. A direct pulp cap is a technique for treating a
pulp exposure with a material that seals over the exposure site and promotes reparative dentin formation. If
the exposure site is the consequence of infected dentin
extending into the pulp, termed a carious pulpal exposure, infection of the pulp already has occurred and removal of the tooth pulp is indicated. If, however, the
pulp exposure occurs in an area of normal dentin (usually as a result of operator error or misjudgment), termed
a mechanical pulpal exposure, and bacterial contamination from salivary exposure does not occur, the potential
success of the direct pulp cap procedure is enhanced.
With either type of exposure, a more favorable prognosis
for the pulp following direct pulp capping may be expected if:
1. The tooth has been asymptomatic (no spontaneous
pain, normal response to thermal testing, and is vital)
before the operative procedure.
2. The exposure is small, less than 0.5 mm in diameter.
3. The hemorrhage from the exposure site is easily
controlled.
4. The exposure occurred in a clean, uncontaminated
field (such as provided by rubber dam isolation).
5. The exposure was relatively atraumatic and little
desiccation of the tooth occurred, with no evidence of
aspiration of blood into the dentin (dentin blushing).
A deep caries excavation close to the pulp, which may
result in either an undetected pulpal exposure or a visible pulpal exposure, should be covered with a calcium
hydroxide liner that can stimulate formation of dentin
bridges (reparative dentin) over the exposure. However,
for amalgam restorations, deep excavations not encroaching on the pulp should be covered with a glass-

ionomer material that will contribute to thermal protection and provide mechanical protection from amalgam
condensation forces at thicknesses of 1 to 1.5 mm or
greater.
In addition to the use of calcium hydroxide materials,
the use of resin bonding agents on exposed pulps may be
considered, as may the technique described earlier in
this chapter in the section on Advanced Carious Lesions.
The choice between these approaches is controversial.
After the involved tooth has been prepared, excavated, and medicated, a suitable restorative material
must be placed. The selection of a material depends on
both the amount of missing tooth structure and the expected length of service anticipated for this temporary
restoration. Amalgam, Fuji IX and IRM are the most frequently used materials for caries control procedures.
Sometimes, a tooth-colored material (composite or glass
ionomer) may be contraindicated because of difficulty
in removing the esthetic material during the permanent
restoration procedure.
If a long interval is anticipated between the caries control procedure and the permanent restoration, amalgam
will ensure better maintenance of tooth position and
proper contour. If significant portions of the proximal or
occlusal surfaces are missing, an amalgam temporary
restoration will maintain the adjacent and occlusal tooth
contact better than other temporary restorative materials, such as IRM. The extent of the access preparation
and tooth structure loss will indicate the need for a matrix application before placement of the restorative material (Fig. 3-50). Matrix choice and application are described in later chapters. Condensation and carving
should be accomplished in the conventional manner.
Precise anatomic form is not necessary for temporary
restorations. However, proper proximal contacts and
contours should be established to maintain satisfactory
dimension of the embrasures to foster interdental papilla
health (Fig. 3-51). Teeth lacking interproximal contacts
may drift, making subsequent restoration more difficult.
Also, a condensation technique that exerts less pressure
(i.e., using a spheric amalgam) reduces the chance of pulpal perforation.
Controversies in Caries Control Restorative Treatment Procedures. Different opinions exist concerning

various aspects of caries control technique. Some practitioners advocate removal of all caries in all teeth initially, regardless of the size of the lesion. This approach
is undoubtedly the most effective for controlling the infection from dental caries. This approach, however, has
disadvantages because it necessitates the excavation of
all lesions, which is very laborious. Limiting caries control procedures to pulp-threatening, advanced, carious
lesions is advocated in this text as a more practical procedure. The caries control restorations can be replaced
after the remaining small- to moderate-sized lesions are
completely restored. The interval between the caries

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

carious surfaces (0.8 surfaces/ student) as did the control group (1.8 surfaces/ student). In the high MS group,
the control group had the most new caries (2.5 surfaces/student), while the once-a-month cleaning group
had similar levels (0.96 surfaces/ student) to the low MS
group, and the twice-a-month cleaning group had almost
one-tenth the number of new lesions (0.34 surfaces/
student) as the control group. This study demonstrated
that professional plaque removal on grade school students, even as infrequent as once every 2 weeks, dramatically reduces the development of new carious lesions. Equal or greater reductions can be expected in
patients who practice proper oral hygiene methods for
plaque removal.

XYLITOL GUMS
Xylitol is a natural five-carbon sugar obtained from
birch trees. It keeps the sucrose molecule from binding
with MS. Furthermore, MS cannot ferment (metabolize)
xylitol. Thus xylitol reduces MS by altering their metabolic pathways and enhances remineralization and helps
arrest dentinal caries. It is usually recommended that
a patient chew a piece of xylitol gum after eating or
snacking for 5 to 30 minutes. Chewing any sugar-free
gum after meals reduces the acidogenicity of plaque because chewing stimulates salivary flow, which improves
the buffering of the pH drop that occurs after eating.

PIT-AND-FISSURE SEALANTS
Although fluoride treatments are most effective in preventing smooth surface caries, they are less effective in
preventing pit-and-fissure caries. Although occlusal surfaces account for only 12.5% of all tooth surfaces, they
account for much of the caries in school-age children. In

fact, the 1988 to 1991 NHANES III Survey" revealed
that occlusal surfaces in children's teeth were five times
more likely to be the site of caries than proximal surfaces and twice as likely as facial or lingual surfaces.
Thus, a preventive measure for pit-and-fissure caries is
greatly needed. Pit-and-fissure sealants (Figs. 3-43 and
3-44) were specifically designed for this purpose and
have been demonstrated to be effective. Sealants have
three important preventive effects. First, sealants mechanically fill pits and fissures with an acid-resistant
resin. Second, because the pits and fissures are filled,
sealants deny MS and other cariogenic organisms their
preferred habitat. Third, sealants render the pits and fissures easier to clean by toothbrushing and mastication.
A 1986 to 1987 National Institutes of Dental Research
(NIDR) survey" indicated that an estimated 7.6% of
children aged 5 to 17 had sealants on their permanent
and primary teeth. The NHANES III Survey for 1988 to
1991 reported that about 20% of children aged 5 to 17
had sealants on their permanent or primary teeth, more
than double the number in the previous survey. Yet this
indicates that only 1 in 5 children had sealants! If more
children received sealants, caries prevalence would be reduced.

To date, the dental profession has been slow to accept
pit-and-fissure sealants, and the procedure tends to be
underutilized.54 The reasons for this lack of professional
acceptance have been concerns about the retention rate
of sealants, fear of sealing caries under the sealant, and
cost-effectiveness. These concerns have been addressed
in various studies. For example, in a review of 15 independent clinical studies, Ripa66 concluded that caries
reductions of more than 80% after 1 year and 70% after
2 years are typical results that may be expected after a
single application of sealant. One of these studies re-

E

F
FIG 3-42, cont'd

E and F, Sulcular-vibrating technique for lingual surfaces of mandibular anterior teeth (E) and a most posterior distal surface (F).

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

FIG . 3-43 A and B, Sealant applied to the central fossa of a maxillary second molar. This tooth
was treated because of the appearance of chalky enamel and softening in the central fossa. A
highly filled sealant was used (see Fig. 3-44).

FIG 3-44 A and B, Radiograph of a maxillary first molar with a deep central fossa pit that appears
to penetrate to the dentin. C and D, The central pit was sealed with a highly filled, radiopaque
sealant. The sealant is readily visible on the radiograph.

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

ported a 37% caries reduction after 5 years. Ripa also
found that all studies reported a progressive loss of
sealants." In a 7-year-study involving 110 paired occlusal surfaces (one receiving a sealant and the other receiving an amalgam restoration), comparable effectiveness was found .74 After the 7 years, only one sealed
tooth was found to be carious while three amalgam
restorations were found to have secondary caries. One
half of the sealants were retained for the full 7 years,
30% required one reapplication, 10% required two reapplications, and 10% received three reapplications. The
total average time required to apply the sealants was 10
minutes and 45 seconds while the average time for
placement of the amalgams was 14 minutes and 26 seconds. These data demonstrate the equivalence of
sealants and occlusal amalgam restorations. Sealants,
therefore, have been shown to be effective, to have long-term
retention, to cause regression of active lesions, and to be superior to amalgam restoration in terms of time requirements.

When a sealant is lost, it is most likely a result of a
technical error in its application rather than a result of
poor bond strength. Proper acid-etch bonding of methacrylate and resin polymers to enamel produces a bond
strong enough to retain restorations, orthodontic brackets, and even prosthetic bridges. This same bond, which
is used for sealants, is unlikely to fail if the sealant is applied properly. Sealing partially erupted molar teeth is a
demanding technical procedure. Saliva contamination
of the etched enamel results in precipitation of salivary
glycoproteins that prevent the sealant polymers from
bonding to the enamel. Redrying the contaminated surface will not remove the precipitated salivary proteins
even though the surface will still have an etched appearance. The contaminated surface must be re-etched
to remove the precipitate and properly recondition the
enamel for effective bonding. Indeed, studies of sealant
retention indicate the greatest loss of sealants occurs
within the first 6 months of application, indicating bond
failure most likely because of saliva contamination. Loss
of the sealant's occlusal surface because of attrition is a
less important problem. Whereas sealants lost because
of bond failure leave the fissures exposed and cariessusceptible, loss of only the occlusal portion of sealants
leaves the depths of the fissures still filled with sealant
and therefore caries-resistant. It may be impossible to
clinically distinguish between these two modes of sealant loss. Therefore sealant should be replaced in patients who remain in a high-risk category.
The concern about sealing active carious lesions has
been reported by other independent studies.
These
studies reported that sealed lesions fail to progress and the
number of viable bacteria that could be recovered from
the lesions was progressively reduced over the period of
the studies. Both reports concluded that intentional
sealing of carious lesions may be an acceptable treat-

ment modality for pit-and-fissure caries. One of these
studies by Going and others reported an 89% reversal
from caries-active to caries-inactive after 5 years. That
study further states, "There is no doubt that sealing a
suspected carious pit-and-fissure area is a better clinical
service than watchful waiting for an interval of six
months or more."
The cost-effectiveness of sealant treatment, including replacement of lost sealant versus amalgam treatment, has been studied by Leverett and others . 45 They
concluded that, although the cost of sealant treatment
in caries-inactive patients was not justified, sealants
were cost-effective in caries-active patients. It is recommended, therefore, that sealants not be used on patients who do not have signs of caries activity. If caries
activity is noted either clinically or radiographically,
strong consideration for sealing all pits and fissures
should be made.
The use of sealants is an effective preventive treatment for caries. Indications for the use of sealants are
presented in Table 3-15. Sealants (1) prevent caries in
newly erupted teeth, (2) arrest incipient caries, (3) prevent odontopathogenic bacterial growth in sealed fissures, and (4) prevent infection of other sites. They
should be used on the pits and fissures of patients at
high risk for caries as an alternative to restorations. This
includes the lingual pits on maxillary anterior teeth and
facial pits on mandibular molars. Because caries activity
is high during childhood and adolescence, the patient
should receive frequent recalls and extra preventive
treatment such as sealants during this time. Sealants
also should be used in adults who are at high risk for
developing caries, primarily on those teeth (usually molars) that have deep anatomy. Even though the occlusal
portion of sealants may eventually wear off, sealants offer essential caries protection during the time of high
caries risk in childhood and adolescence. Because of the
well-established effectiveness of sealants, it is not acceptable clinical practice to wait for caries to develop in
pits and fissures and then restore these areas. Prompt
sealing of the molar teeth after eruption should be a routine practice for many children.
RESTORATIONS

The status of a patient's existing restorations may have
an important bearing on the outcome of preventive
measures and caries treatment. Old, corroded metallic
restorations that are rough and therefore plaque-retentive
could be smoothed and polished or replaced. Restoration defects, such as overhangs, open proximal contacts,
and defective contours, contribute to plaque formation
and retention. These defects should be corrected, usually by replacement of the defective restoration. Detection of secondary caries can be difficult around old
restorations. Discoloration of the enamel adjacent to a

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

Indications for Use of Sealants

FIG. -45 A scheme for caries treatment based on the specific
plaque hypothesis. Here caries is treated as an infectious bacteriologic disease. Signs of the disease, such as development
of white spot lesions, indicate the need for antimicrobial treatment. Follow-up assessment is used to determine if the infection still persists and if new lesions are forming. Retreatment
occurs if either is present. Restorative treatment in this model
i s an adjunct to the antimicrobial treatment, not the primary
treatment. OTC, Over the counter.

restoration is suggestive of secondary caries. This appears as a localized opalescent area next to the restoration margins. (Exception: A bluish color of facial or lingual enamel that directly overlies an old, otherwise
acceptable, amalgam restoration does not indicate re-

placement unless for improvement of esthetics. Such a
discoloration may be due to the amalgam itself.) Because metallic restorations are radiopaque, the radiolucency of secondary caries may be masked.
The placement of restorations is preventive only in
the sense of removing large numbers of cariogenic organisms and some of the sites in which they may be protected. It should be remembered that the placement of a
restoration into a cavitated carious tooth does not cure
the carious process.
Strict preventive measures for caries are not necessary
for all patients. Some of those measures would result in
expensive treatment with few benefits for low-risk patients. Only caries-active patients and those at high risk
( who will most likely benefit from preventive measures)
should be treated with comprehensive regimens (Fig.
3-45). Caries activity should be viewed as a problem of
oral ecology in which there is an abnormal abundance
of cariogenic organisms. Preventive treatment is based
on reducing the pathogen population size and increasing the resistance of the tooth to cariogenic attack. The
cariogenicity of plaque can be controlled by denying the
food supply, denying the habitat, using antimicrobial
therapy, and stopping succession. The most successful
preventive treatment combines all of these treatments in
a specific program designed for an individual that considers both caries and periodontal disease.
CARIES TREATMENT
Even though diagnostic and preventive measures
have been improved and are more widely used, the repair of destruction caused by the carious process will
still be necessary for many patients. The treatment

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

regimen is dictated by the patient's caries status. If the
patient is at high risk for caries development, his or
her treatment should consist of both restorative procedures and many of the preventive measures described
previously. Then the damage done by caries can be repaired and the patient's risk status for further caries
attacks reduced. Sometimes patients present with
acute carious lesions in numerous teeth. Because of
the jeopardy these teeth may have and the large numbers and sites of cariogenic bacteria, caries control
restorative treatment may be indicated as described
later in this section. This procedure rids the patient
rapidly of the carious lesions, thereby providing better assessment of the pulpal responses of some teeth
and greater success of the preventive measures instituted. Later, the teeth will be restored with more definitive restorations.
Important in the treatment success are the patient's
education about what has caused the caries problem and
what are his or her responsibilities. Having the patient
understand the problem and the benefits of the recommended treatment will likely provide him or her an increased motivation to do what is necessary to obtain
good oral health. Appropriate homecare is the patient's
primary responsibility. This activity, which includes
proper flossing and brushing as well as using prescribed
adjunct treatment modalities (fluoride, chlorhexidine,
xylitol gums, and so on), must be accepted by the patient. Likewise, their commitment to necessary restorative intervention also is required. Many patients will become willing partners in this approach to treatment if
they understand why they have a problem and why
their role is necessary.
If the patient has cavitated carious lesions, they should
be restored first in the treatment regimen, sometimes using caries control restorations. By restoring the teeth
first, large numbers of MS organisms and their favored
and protected sites will be removed. If antimicrobial
therapy is instituted first, it may disrupt the oral flora
but allow the virulent cariogenic organisms in the unrestored cavitated areas to then flourish in unprotected
sites. Restorations remove large masses of infectious organisms, but more importantly, they remove habitats
for more bacterial adherence.
For high-risk patients, sealants should be applied to
at-risk teeth while doing the necessary restorative procedures. This will better insure their caries-free status in
the future. Intense, short-term use of antimicrobial
agents should then be implemented. These may include
various fluoride modalities, chlorhexidine, and, sometimes, antibiotics such as vancomycin or kanamycin (see
Table 3-14). These antimicrobial agents will reduce the
numbers of cariogenic bacteria and render tooth surfaces more prone for remineralization. The high-risk patient also should be instructed to use fluoride rinses and

xylitol chewing gums regularly. After the initial phase of
restorative and preventive treatment, the patient should
be placed on a strict recall schedule. At recall, restorations and sealants should be evaluated, microbiologic assays done, and a careful clinical examination
performed.
Many of the later chapters in this textbook focus on
the techniques for restoration of tooth defects with various restorative materials. However, the following information describes the caries control type of restorative
treatment.
Much success has been obtained in decreasing the incidence of caries. Research activity has been intense in
developing an understanding of the carious process
and, consequently, in preventing caries. However, if the
carious process cannot be prevented or reversed, it must
be controlled. Currently no therapeutic medicament will
stop the progression of caries, and while the "arrested
caries" phenomenon is recognized, it is not yet clearly
understood so as to be universally applicable. Therefore the recognized control of cavitated carious lesions
occurs predominantly by the clinical removal of the infected area from the tooth and the subsequent restoration of the tooth to optimal form, function, and esthetics. The specific clinical treatment depends on the extent
of the destruction that has occurred, and subsequent
chapters in this book relate to the definitive treatment of
carious lesions.
Once caries has produced cavitation of the tooth surface, preventive measures are usually inadequate to prevent further progression of the lesion. Surgical removal
of the lesion and restoration of the tooth then are required
to eliminate the progression of the lesion. Currently, operative treatment constitutes the majority of all caries
treatment. Restoration of carious lesions is the most effective method for control of the progression of active, cavitated lesions. The term caries control refers to an operative procedure in which multiple teeth with acute
threatening caries are treated quickly by: (1) removing
the infected tooth structure, (2) medicating the pulp, if
necessary, and (3) restoring the defects with a temporary
material. With this technique, most of the infecting organisms and their protecting sites are removed, limiting
further acute spread of caries throughout the mouth. The
caries control procedure must be accompanied by other
preventive measures that reduce the likelihood of continued buildup or presence of pathogenic organisms (Table
3-16). Teeth rapidly treated by caries control procedures
are subsequently treated by using routine restorative
techniques, if appropriate pulpal responses are obtained.
Also, the intent of caries control procedures is to make
i mmediate, corrective intervention in advanced carious
lesions to both prevent and assess pulpal disease and
avoid possible sequelae such as toothache, root canal
therapy, or more complex ultimate restorations.

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

CARIES CONTROL RESTORATION

Although caries has declined in the general population of the United States, a
significant segment of the population, including lower
socioeconomic groups and minorities, continues to suffer from extensive caries. Victims of acute caries (lesions that have progressed at least half the distance
from the DEJ to the pulp) typically have poor oral
health care habits, minimal exposure to fluorides, a deficient or highly cariogenic diet, and poor or limited access to dental care. Missing teeth, retained roots, and periodontal and/or pulpal diseases often complicate the
clinical situation (Fig. 3-46). Active, rapidly progressing
caries urgently needs clinical treatment when dentin
softening has progressed at least half the distance from
the DEJ to the pulp. Acute caries may progress rapidly
without operative intervention. Conventional restorative treatment techniques may not address acute problems with sufficient rapidity to prevent pulpal infection
and/or death of the pulp. The treatment objective for caries
Objectives and Indications.

control is to remove the decay from all of the advanced carious
lesions, place appropriate pulpal medication, and restore the
lesions in the most expedient manner. Temporary restora-

tive materials (Intermediate Restorative Material [IRM],

A
FIG . 3-46

Fuji IX, or amalgam) are usually the treatment materials
of choice. This treatment of acute lesions will quickly remove gross infectious lesions. This will not only generate some time while many of the other associated dental
problems can be treated, but also will provide a time period for pulpal assessment of the more seriously compromised teeth. These temporary restorations usually
should be replaced with more permanent restorations at
a later date, when the factors promoting caries formation have been controlled and the prognosis of the tooth
pulp has been determined.
Caries control is an intermediate step in restorative
treatment and has several other indications. Teeth with
questionable pulpal prognosis should be treated with a
caries control approach. In this way the progression of
demineralization of the dentin is stopped, and the response of the pulp can be determined before making a
commitment to permanent restoration. Another clinical
situation when caries control is a useful approach occurs during an operative procedure when a tooth is unexpectedly found to have extensive caries. Caries control
technique provides the busy practitioner the flexibility
to respond rapidly to stop the carious process in that
tooth without causing major changes in the daily time

B

Acute, rampant caries. A, Severe carious involvement in anterior teeth. B, Severe cari ous involvement in posterior teeth.

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

schedule. The caries control procedure allows quick removal of the caries, placement of a temporary restoration, and the rescheduling of the patient for a more timeconsuming, permanent restoration. Before placement of
a permanent restoration, a caries control procedure also
provides a suitable delay that gives the pulp time to recover, allowing a better assessment of the pulpal status.
A caries control procedure is indicated when: (1) the
caries is extensive enough that adverse pulpal sequelae
are soon likely to occur, (2) the goal of treatment is to remove the nidus of caries infection in the patient's mouth,
or (3) a tooth has extensive carious involvement that
cannot or should not be permanently restored because
of inadequate available time or questionable pulpal
prognosis.
Operative Technique. When numerous acute lesions
are present, the practitioner should treat these without
delay in one or two appointments with the caries control procedure. Thus the rate of the carious process is
significantly reduced, potential pulpal irritation is minimized, and the patient is in a healthier and more comfortable state. The following description involves only a
single tooth for the sake of simplicity. Temporization of
multiple teeth in a single setting is a practical clinical
procedure and is simply an extension of the procedure

Temporary amalgam
restoration
Base/liner

for a single tooth. Fig. 3-47 shows a schematic representation of the caries control procedure and Fig. 3-48 provides a preoperative radiograph of the tooth described
in the following sections.
Anesthesia is usually indicated for the affected area
unless a test preparation for pulpal vitality is to be performed. The indications and technique for a test preparation are presented in Chapter 9. Anesthesia usually is
essential for providing patient comfort, reducing saliva
flow, and promoting good patient cooperation during
the procedure. Because pulpal necrosis may occur when
oral fluids contaminate exposure sites during excavation
of advanced carious lesions, the operating site must be
isolated. The rubber dam provides an excellent means
of isolation and protection of the excavation site from
contamination with oral fluids during the operative
procedure, and therefore should be used routinely in
most caries control procedures.
The primary objective of the caries control tooth preparation is to provide adequate visual and mechanical access to facilitate the removal of the infected portion of
the carious dentin. The initial opening of the tooth is
made with the largest carbide bur that can be used. A
high-speed handpiece with an air-water spray is the
most practical instrument for this procedure (Fig. 3-49).

FIG 3-41 Schematic representation of caries control procedure. Faciolingual
( A) and mesiodistal (B) cross-sections of mandibular first molar showing extensive
preoperative occlusal and proximal carious lesions. C, Tooth after excavation of extensive caries. Note remaining unsupported enamel. D, Temporary amalgam
restoration inserted after appropriate liner/base material is applied.

CHAPTER

3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

3-48 Preoperative clinical radiograph illustrating extensive carious lesion in proximal and occlusal regions of mandibular right first molar.

FIG

Some steps of initial tooth preparation are modified for
the caries control procedure. (See Chapter 6 for further
considerations in tooth preparation.) Retaining unsupported enamel is permissible in caries control procedures
because this tooth structure, even though undermined,
assists in the retention of the temporary restorative material. Removal of the unsupported enamel will occur
when the final restoration is placed at a later date. Retaining sound portions of old restorative material also
may enhance the temporary restoration and reduce the
risk of pulpal exposure. However, care must be exercised
when deciding not to remove all old restorative material
because it may mask residual infected dentin.
Once access has been gained, the identification and
removal of caries depends primarily on the dentist's
interpretation of tactile stimuli. Color differences cannot be used as a reliable index for complete caries removal, although caries-indicating solutions may provide color guides. In rapidly advancing lesions, the
softened dentin shows little or no color change while
more slowly advancing lesions have more discoloration. Dentin that appears leathery, peels off in small
flakes, or can be judiciously penetrated by a sharp explorer should be removed.
Because fine tactile discrimination is required for complete removal of caries, the use of a high-speed handpiece at full speed is contraindicated for the removal of
deep caries. Effective caries removal can be accomplished with: (1) hand instrumentation using spoon excavators, (2) a slow-speed handpiece with a large round
bur, or (3) a high-speed handpiece using a round bur
operated just above stall-out speed (low speed). The use
of spoon excavators may result in peeling off amounts of
softened dentin larger than intended and therefore result
in inadvertent pulp exposure. Thus, hand excavation requires great skill and sharp instruments. Rotary instruments provide good control and require less skill. The
high-speed handpiece, when running just above stalling
speed, provides good control. A simple technique is to
run the handpiece slowly enough that the bur stalls
shortly after contacting the dentin. Repeated applications of the bur will remove dentin in small increments

A

B
I nitial caries excavation of tooth in Fig. 3-48. A, Note
remaining caries that requires further excavation. Also note
wedge in place protecting rubber dam aNd soft tissue and that
it has been lightly shaved by bur. B, Note remaining unsupported enamel under mesiolingual cusp.
FIG . 3-49

and allow the operator to carefully monitor changes in
both hardness and color. After removal of softened dentin, it is then helpful to carefully evaluate the excavated
area with a sharp explorer to determine if the remaining
dentin is hard and sound. Extreme care must be used
with the explorer to prevent penetration into the pulp.
Penetration of the explorer into the pulp may cause pulpal infection, increasing the possibility of pulpal death.
Usually all soft, infected dentin is removed during
caries control procedures. However, in asymptomatic
teeth that have deep lesions (where complete excavation
of softened dentin is anticipated to produce pulpal exposure), the softened dentin nearest the pulp may be
left. The deliberate retention of softened dentin near the
tooth pulp and medication of the remaining dentin with
calcium hydroxide is termed an indirect pulp cap. The
goals of the caries control procedure are to prevent pulp
exposure and aid pulpal recovery by medication. The
portion of the remaining softened dentin is covered
with a calcium hydroxide liner and the excavated area is
restored with a temporary material. Calcium hydroxide
promotes reparative dentin bridges over any area of
frank pulpal exposure. Such repair usually occurs in 6 to
8 weeks and may be evident radiographically in 10 to 12
weeks. Success may be improved with a resin-modified
glass-ionomer liner placed over the calcium hydroxide.

CHAPTER3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

FIG . 3-51 Temporary amalgam restoration completed for
caries control procedure. Caries has been eliminated, the pulp
adequately protected, and interarch and intraarch positions of
tooth maintained by caries control procedure.

control restoration and its replacement with a permanent restoration provides time to complete the following: assessment of the pulpal response to excavation
and medication, treatment of the cariogenic infection
with prescribed anticaries measures, assessment of the
patient's ability to perform oral hygiene procedures,
assessment of the patient's compliance with dietary
changes, and assessment of caries activity elsewhere in
the mouth. The outcome of these factors may have an
i mportant bearing on the choice of materials and techniques for the final restoration of the teeth. Regardless
of the caries control concept endorsed, advanced carious lesions should be treated without delay to minimize
the potential of adverse pulpal reaction and to provide
time for assessment of the pulpal response to therapy.
Also, different opinions present regarding the indication for indirect pulp capping procedures. Some practitioners routinely remove all softened dentin even if a
pulpal exposure is likely. Other practitioners routinely
leave a small amount of dentin in the area of a potential
pulpal exposure, regardless of the status of such dentin.
Finally, some practitioners use the indirect pulp capping
technique only when the status of remaining dentin in
close proximity to the pulp is questionable. Data are not
available to guide the final decision in this area. However, as presented in Advanced Carious Lesions, a newer
concept endorses the technique of deliberate removal of
the coronal pulpal tissue; placement of calcium hydroxide directly on the exposed pulpal tissue; and, finally,
placement of a resin-modified glass ionomer on the calcium hydroxide and surrounding dentin periphery.
Another controversial issue with the indirect pulp
capping treatment is whether or not to reenter the
treated tooth at a later time to determine if, in fact, the
remaining dentin has remineralized, providing a sound
bridge of tooth structure over the affected area. Some
practitioners routinely reenter the affected area to verify
this remineralization and/or to remove any caries left
over the remineralized layer. Others believe that re-

mineralization will occur and any remaining bacteria
become inviable; consequently, reentry into the excavated area is not practical because such a procedure
may cause additional pulpal irritation. Carefully controlled studies are lacking, but the consensus is shifting
against reentry procedures.
Some controversy exists concerning the medication
material to place over deeply excavated areas. Although
most practitioners recognize the potential for stimulating reparative dentin formation with the use of calcium
hydroxide materials, this is not universally accepted.
More importantly, there is controversy regarding the
mechanism of action for calcium hydroxide liners. One
group of practitioners supports the concept that a calcium hydroxide liner must be in direct contact with pulpal tissue to cause reparative dentin formation. Therefore these practitioners believe that the use of calcium
hydroxide liners in other than a direct pulpal exposure
situation will not stimulate reparative dentin formation.
However, other practitioners believe that the calcium
hydroxide material is soluble and therefore is transmitted by the fluid in the dentinal tubules to the pulp and,
consequently, causes reparative dentin formation. Also,
as mentioned earlier, the use of resin bonding agents
may prove beneficial for pulp capping procedures.
Finally, there is minor controversy, or at least confusion, about the terminology related to this procedure.
Although this section has termed the procedure caries
control restorative treatment, other terms such as interim restoration, treatment restoration, or temporary
restoration may be used. All of these descriptions have
validity when applied to the technique of removing
acute caries without delay and temporarily restoring the
involved tooth or teeth.
SUMMARY
Diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of dental caries
must be the foremost objectives of operative dentistry.
Research efforts in understanding the caries process;
maximizing the benefits of fluoride and chlorhexidine
use; and, perhaps, developing anticaries vaccines must
be continued. Patient education and motivation in the
prevention and treatment of dental caries must be
stressed. Finally, the clinical treatment of cavitated, carious teeth must be accomplished expeditiously, j udiciously, and appropriately.
REFERENCES
1. Alaluusua S et al: Salivary caries related tests as predictors of
future caries increments in teenagers: a three-year longitudinal study, Oral Microl Immunol 5:77-81, 1990.
2. Alexander M: Microbial ecology, NewYork,1971, John Wiley &
Sons.
3. Antoku S et al: Effect of controllable parameters on oral radiographs, Quintessence Int 15:71-76, 1984.
4. Anusavice KJ: Management of dental caries as a chronic infectious disease, J Dent Educ 62(10):791-802, 1998.

CHAPTER

Dental materials science for restorative dentistry is derived from materials science. The field of materials science can be organized in terms of four categories of materials, with four categories of structural considerations
governing their properties, and with four categories of
general properties. For each of these, there is a rich basis of materials science definitions. This information is
presented in greater depth in textbooks of dental mate
rials 1,11-13,19,34,51,57,59,60,83,90,99,130,147,176,178,189,193-195,202,251,262 but it
is reviewed here for reference during discussions in
other parts of this text.

REVIEW OF MATERIALS
SCIENCE DEFINITIONS
MATERIAL CATEGORIES
The four categories of materials are metals, ceramics,
polymers, and composites. Each one of these has characteristic microstructures and resulting properties. It is
paramount in every situation in restorative dentistry
that the structures and properties involved are known.
Formal engineering definitions of each category are not
practically useful. The following definitions are most often substituted instead.
Metals. A metal is based on an element that diffusely
shares valence electrons among all of the atoms in the
solid, instead of forming local ionic or covalent bonds.
A metal alloy is an intentional mixture of metallic elements that occurs in a chemically intimate manner. As
a result of mixing, the elements may be completely soluble (e.g., Au-Cu) or may be only partially soluble (e.g.,
Ag-Sn), producing more than one phase. Metallic systems are almost exclusively crystalline and most exist as
polycrystalline solids. The individual crystals, or grains,
are generally microscopic. Grains may be all the same

FIG . 4-1 Schematic example of the microstructure of a crystalli ne two-phase metal alloy involving gold (clear) and copper
(solid) atoms. The grain boundaries are shown as discontinui ties between the individual crystals (grains).

4

Dental Materials

composition (single phase) or several different phases
(multiphase). Different phases represent locally different
chemical compositions. In metal alloys, no phase (or
crystal or grain) ever represents a pure metallic element
(Fig. 4-1).
The distribution of phases is influenced by the thermal and mechanical history of the solid, allowing a
wide range of properties to be developed from a single
overall composition. The periodic table consists mostly
of metallic elements. Thus, there is a wide range of potential metallurgic systems.
Metals and metal alloys are generally prone to both
chemical and electrochemical corrosion. Chemical corrosion occurs by direct chemical reaction on the surfaces of
metallic objects of metal atoms with oxygen or other
chemicals. Electrochemical corrosion occurs when two
metallic electrodes of differing composition, structure, or
local environment, while connected by a circuit and an
electrolyte, produce metallic ions at the anode and an
electron flow toward the cathode resulting in anodic and
cathodic reactions. Most chemical reactions can proceed
by both chemical and electrochemical mechanisms.
Clearly, in a moist environment, such as the mouth, electrochemical reactions are very likely.
Ceramics. Ceramics are chemically intimate mixtures
of metallic and nonmetallic elements, which allow ionic
(K20) and/or covalent bonding (SiO2) to occur. In the
periodic table, only a few elements such as carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen, and chlorine are nonmetallic.
The most common ceramics in dentistry are chemical
mixtures of three main metallic oxides (SiO2 A1203, K20),
as shown in Fig. 4-2. Ceramics also may result from corrosion of metals (Fe2O3, SnO, Ag2S).
The corrosion behavior of metallic elements is classified as active, passive, or i mmune with respect to chemical
or electrochemical reactions with other elements in their
environment. Active metals corrode to form solid ceramic products or soluble products. For example, iron
reacts with oxygen to form iron oxide. Passive metals

I I G 4-2 Examples of major chemical components involved in
dental ceramics.

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

5. Arnold RR et al: Antimicrobial activity of the secretory innate
defense factors lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, and lysozyme. In
Guggenheim B, editor: Cariology Today, Basel, 1984, Karger.
6. Backer DO: Posteruptive changes in dental enamel, J Dent Res
45:503,1966.
7. Bader JD, Brown JP: Dilemmas in caries diagnosis, J Am Dent
Assoc 123:48-50, 1993.
8. Baum LJ: Dentinal pulp conditions in relation to caries lesions, Int Dent J 20:309-337, 1970.
9. Beiswanger BB: The clinical validation of early caries detection methodologies. In: Stookey GK, editor: Early detection of
dental caries: Proceedings of the 1ST Annual Indiana Conference.
Indianapolis, 1996, Indiana University School of Dentistry.
10. Beltran-Aguilar ED, Goldstein JW, Lockwood SA: Fluoride
varnishes-a review of their clinical use, cariostatic mechanism, efficacy, and safety, JAm Dent Assoc 131:589-596, 2000.
11. Brwen WH: Nature of plaque. In Meleher AH, Zarb GA, editors: Preventive dentistry: nature, pathogenicity and clinical
control of plaque, Oral Sci Rev 9:3, 1976.
12. Brannstrbm M, Gabroglio R: The dentinal tubules and the
odontoblastic processes: a scanning electron microscopic
study, Acta Odontol Scand 30:291-311, 1972.
13. Brannstrbm M, Lind PO: Pulpal response to early dentinal
caries, J Dent Res 44:1045-1050, 1965.
14. Brown JP, Lazar V: The economic state of dentistry, an overview, J Am Dent Assoc 129:1682-1691, 1998.
15. Brown LJ: Indicators for caries management from the patient
history, J Dent Educ 61(11):855-60, 1997.
16. Brown LR, Dreizen S, Handler S: Effects of selected caries
preventive regimens on microbial changes following radiationinduced xerostomia in cancer patients. In Stiles HM, Loesche
WJ, O'Brien TC, editors: Microbial aspects of dental caries,
Microbiol Abstr Spec Supp11:275, 1976.
17. Brunelle JA: Prevalence of dental sealants in U.S. schoolchildren. J Dent Res 68(special issue):183, 1989.
18. Disney J et al: The University of North Carolina caries risk assessment study: further developments in caries risk prediction, Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 20:64-75, 1992.
19. Dreizen S, Brown LR: Xerostomia and dental caries. In Stiles
HM, Loesche WJ, O'Brien TC, editors: Microbial aspects of
dental caries, Microbiol Abstr Spec Suppl 1:263, 1976.
20. Edgar WM: Saliva and dental health. Clinical implications of
saliva: report of a consensus meeting, Br Dent J 169:96-98,
1990.
21. Emilson CG: Potential efficacy of chlorhexidine against mutans streptococci and human dental caries, J Dent Res 73:682691,1994.
22. Espelid I: Radiographic diagnosis and treatment decision on
approximal caries, Community Dent Oral Epidemo114:265-270,
1986.
23. Fejerskov O et al: Plaque and caries development in experimental human fissures: structural and microbiologic features
(abstract no. 457), J Dent Res 56(special issue), 1977.
24. Fluoridation facts. Chicago, 1993, American Dental Association.
25. Frank RM, Voegel JC: Ultrastructure of the human odontoblast process and its mineralization during dental caries,
Caries Res 19:367-380, 1980.
26. FusayamaT: Two layers of carious dentin: diagnosis and treatment, Oper Dent 42:63, 1979.
27. Garg AK, Malo MM: Manifestations and treatment of xerostomia and associated oral effects secondary to head and
neck radiation therapy, J Am Dent Assoc 128:1128-1133, 1997.
28. Glass RL, editor: The first international conference on the declining prevalence of dental caries, J Dent Res 61:1301, 1982.

29. Going RE et al: The viability of microorganisms in carious lesions five years after covering with a fissure sealant, JAm Dent
Assoc 97:455, 1978.
30. Govan JR: In vivo significance of bacterioicins and bacteriocin
receptors, Scand J Infect Dis Suppl 49:31-37, 1986.
31. Handleman SL: Effect of sealant placement on occlusal caries
progression, Clin Prevent Dent 4(5):11-16, 1982.
32. Hausen H: Caries prediction-state of the art, Community
Dent Oral Epidemiol 25:87-96, 1997.
33. Hay DI: Specific functional salivary proteins. In Guggenheim
B, editor: Cariology today, Basel, 1984, Karger.
34. Hillman JD, Dzuback AL, Andrews SW: Colonization of the
human oral cavity by a Streptococcus mutans mutant producing increased bacteriocin, J Dent Res 66(6):1092-1094, 1987.
35. Hillman JD, Yaphe BI, Johnson KP: Colonization of the human oral cavity by a strain of Streptococcus mutans, J Dent Res
64(11):1272-1274, 1985.
36. Hodge HC: The concentration of fluoride in drinking water to
give the point of minimum caries with maximum safety, J Am
Dent Assoc 40:436, 1950.
37. Horowitz HS, Herfetz SB, Paulsen S: Retention and effectiveness of a single application of an adhesive sealant in preventing occlusal caries: final report after five years of study in
Kalespel, Montana, J Am Dent Assoc 95:1133, 1977.
38. Jett BD, Gilmore MS: The growth inhibitory effect of the Enterococcus faecalis bacteriocin encoded by pAD1 extends to
the oral streptococci, J Dent Res 69(10):1640-1645, 1990.
39. Juhl M: Three-dimensional replicas of pit-and-fissure morphology, Scand J Dent Res 91(2):90, 1983.
40. Kantor ML et al: Efficacy of dental radiographic practices:
opinions or image receptors, examination selection, and patient selection, J Am Dent Assoc 119:259-268, 1989.
41. Klock B, Krasse B: Effect of caries preventive measures in children with high numbers of S. mutans and lactobacilli, Scand J
Dent Res 86:221, 1978.
42. Krasse B: Caries risk, Chicago, 1985, Quintessence.
43. Kuboki Y, Liu C-F, Fusayama T: Mechanism of differential
staining in carious dentin, J Dent Res 62:713, 1983.
44. Lehner T, Challacombe SJ, Caldwell J: An immunological investigation in to the prevention of caries in deciduous teeth
of rhesus monkeys, Arch Oral Bio120:305, 1975.
45. Leverett JB et al: Cost effectiveness of sealants as an alternative
to conventional restorations, J Dent Res 1143(57A):130, 1978.
46. LOe H: Human research model for the production and prevention of gingivitis, J Dent Res 50:256, 1971.
47. Loesche WJ: Role of Streptococcus mutans in human dental
decay, Microbiol Rev 50:353-380, 1986.
48. Loesche WJ: Clinical and microbiological aspects of chemotherapeutic agents used according to the specific plaque hypothesis, J Dent Res 58:2404, 1979.
49. Loyola-Rodriguiez JP et al: Purification and properties of extracellular mutacin, a bacteriocin from Streptococcus sobrinus,
J Gen Microbiol 138(pt2):269-274, 1992.
50. Mandel ID: Caries prevention-a continuing need, Int Dent
J 43:67-70, 1993.
51. Mandel ID: Salivary factors in caries prediction. In Bibby BG,
Shern RJ, editors: Methods of caries prediction, Microbiol
Abstr Spec Suppl 1978:147.
52. Mandel ID, Ellison SA: Naturally occurring defense mechanisms in saliva. In Tanzer JM, editor: Animal models in cariology (supplement to Microbiology Abstracts), Washington, DC,
1981, Information Retrieval.
53. Marketing Information Services, North Brook, Ill, 1984, A.C.
Nielson.

CHAPTER 3

Cariology: The Lesion, Etiology, Prevention, and Control

54. Mertz-Fairhurst EJ: Guest editorial: Pit-and-fissure sealants:
a global lack of science transfer? j Dent Res 7(80):1543-1544,
1992.
55. Mertz-Fairhurst EJ et al: Ultraconservative and cariostatic
sealed restorations: results at year 10, J Am Dent Assoc 129:
55-66,1998.
56. Mileman P: Radiographic caries diagnosis and restorative treatment decision making, Gronigen, 1985, Drukkerij Vanden
Deren BV.
57. Minah GE, Loesche WJ: Sucrose metabolism in resting-cell
suspensions of caries-associated and non-caries-associated
dental plaque, Infect Immun 17:43-61, 1977.
58. National Center for Health Statistics (1994). Plan and operation of the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey, 1988-94 (PHS publication no. 94-1308), Vital Health
Stat 1(32).
59. Newburn E: Cariology, ed 3, Chicago, 1989, Quintessence.
60. Ogawa K: The ultra structure and hardness of the transparent
layer of human carious dentin, J Dent Res 62:7-10, 1983.
61. OoshimaT,YasufukuY, Izumitani A: Effect of mutacin administration on Streptococcus mutans-induced dental caries in rats,
Microbiol Immunol 29(12):1163-1173, 1985.
62. Palmer C: Dental spending to hit $57 billion. ADA News 30(14),
1, 11, 1999.
63. Parfitt GJ: The speed of development of the carious cavity,
Br Dent J 100:204-207, 1956.
64. Pashley DH: Clinical correlation of dentin structure and function, J Prosthet Dent 66:777-781, 1991.
65. Pitts NB, Rimmer PA: An in vivo comparison of radiographic
and directly assessed clinical caries status of posterior approximal surfaces in primary and permanent teeth, Caries Res
26:146-152, 1992.
66. Ripa LW: Occlusal sealants: rationale and review of clinical
trials, Int Dent j 30(2):127,1980.
67. Rolla G, Ciardi JE, Schultz SA: Adsorption of glucosyltransferase to saliva coated hydroxyapatite, Scand J Dent Res 91(2):
112, 1983.
68. Russell C, Melville TH: A review bacteria in the human
mouth, J Appl Bacterio144:163, 1978.
69. Sheiham A: Dental caries in underdeveloped countries. In
Guggenheim B, editor: Cariology today, Basel, 1984, Karger.

70. Silverstone LM: In vitro studies with special reference to the
enamel surface and the enamel-resin interface. In Silverstone
LM, Dogon IC, editors: Proceedings of an international symposium on the acid etch technique, St Paul, Minn, 1975, North
Central.
71. Silverstone LM et al: Dental caries, NewYork,1981, Macmillian.
72. Simonsen R: Cost-effectiveness of pit-and-fissure sealants at
10 years, Quintessence Int 20(2):75-82, 1989.
73. Stephan RM: Intra-oral hydrogen-ion concentration associated with dental caries activity, J Dent Res 23(4):257, 1944.
74. Straffon LH, Dennison JB: Clinical evaluation comparing
sealant and amalgam after 7 years: final report, JAm Dent Assoc 117:751-755, 1988.
75. Svanberg M, Loesche WJ: Salivary concentration of Streptococcus mutans and Streptococcus sanguis and the colonization
of artificial fissures in humans by these organisms, Arch Oral
Bio122:441-447, 1977.
76. Svanberg M, Westergren G: Effect of SnF2, administered as
mouth rinses or topically applied, on Streptococcus mutans,
Streptococcus sanguis and lactobacilli in dental plaque and
saliva, Scand J Dent Res 91(2):123, 1983.
77. Svenson B: Accuracy of radiographic caries diagnosis at different kilovoltages and two film speeds, Swed Dent j 9:37-43,1985.
78. Swift EJ, Trope M: Treatment options for the exposed vital
pulp, Pract Periodont Aesthet Dent 11(6):735-739, 1999.
79. Tanzer JM: Xylitol chewing gum and dental caries, Int Dent J
45(Suppl 1):65-76,1995.
80. Taubman MA, Smith DS: Effects of local immunization with
glucosyltransferase fraction from Streptococcus mutans on dental caries in rats and hamsters, J Immunol 118:710, 1977.
81. Trahan L: Xylitol: a review of its action on mutans streptococci
and dental plaque-its clinical significance. Int Dent 145
(Supp11):77-92,1995.
82. van Houte J: Oral bacterial colonization: mechanism and
i mplications. In Stiles WJ, Loesche WJ, O'Bryan TC, editors:
Microbial aspects of dental caries, Microbiol Abstr Spec Supp11:3,
1976.
83. Visgaitis G: How much candy we eat every year, USA Today,
June 17, 1993, C-1.
84. Yamada T et al: The extent of the odontoblastic process in
normal and carious human dentin, Dent Res 62:798, 1983.

I.

II.

III.

Review of materials science definitions, 135
A. Material categories, 135
1. Metals, 135
2. Ceramics, 135
3. Polymers, 136
4. Composites, 136
B. Material structure, 137
C. Material properties, 137
1. Physical properties, 137
2. Mechanical properties, 140
3. Chemical properties, 143
4. Biologic properties, 144
Biomechanics for restorative dentistry, 145
A. Biomechanical unit, 145
B. Stress transfer, 146
C. Strain within tooth structure (tooth flexure), 146
D. Effects of aging, 146
E. Principles of biomechanics, 148
Direct restorative dental materials, 148
A. Amalgam, 148
1. Terminology, 148
2. Classification, 149
3. Composition, structure, and properties, 152
4. Mercury management, 158
5. Amalgam waste management, 165
6. Clinical considerations, 168
B. Liners and bases, 170
1. Terminology and classification, 170
2. Objectives for pulpal protection, 171
3. Composition, structure, and properties, 174
4. Clinical considerations, 174
C. Dental adhesion, 177
1. Terminology, 177
2. Classification, 179
3. Requirements for adhesion, 179
4. Bonding strengths, 179
5. Bonding systems, 181
D. Pit-and-fissure sealants, 187
1. Terminology, 187
2. Classification, 187
3. Composition, structure, and properties, 188
4. Clinical considerations, 189
E. Composites, 190
1. Terminology, 190
2. Historical development, 191
3. Classification, 194
4. Light-curing variables, 198
5. Composition, structure, and properties, 202
6. Clinical considerations, 206

I V.

V.

F. Glass ionomers, 207
1. Terminology and classification, 207
2. Historical development, 208
3. Composition, structure, and properties, 210
4. Clinical considerations, 210
G. Direct-filling gold, 211
1. Terminology and classification, 211
2. Composition, structure, and properties, 211
3. Clinical considerations, 212
I ndirect restorative dental materials, 212
A. Impression materials, 212
1. Terminology and classification, 212
2. Composition, structure, and properties, 213
3. Clinical considerations, 214
B. Cast metal restorations, 214
1. Terminology, 214
2. Classification, 215
3. Composition, structure, and properties of
gold castings, 215
4. Clinical considerations, 217
C. Dental cements, 217
1. Terminoiogy and classification, 217
2. Composition, structure, and properties, 219
3. Clinical considerations, 220
D. Machined restorations, 220
1. Terminology and classification, 221
2. Stages of fabrication, 221
3. Composition, structure, and properties of
machined materials, 221
4. Composition, structure, and properties of
composite cements, 223
5. Clinical considerations, 224
Safety and efficacy, 224
A. Standards programs, 224
1. American Dental Association, 224
2. American National Standards Institute, 225
3. Food and Drug Administration, 225
4. American Society for Testing and
Materials, 225
5. Federation Dentaire Internationale, 225
6. International Standards Organization, 225
B. Safety for dental professionals, 226
1. Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, 226
2. Environmental Protection Agency, 228

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

corrode to form thin films of ceramic products that remain adherent to their surfaces and prevent further corrosion (passivation). Titanium reacts with oxygen to form
a titanium dioxide coating (TiO,) that prevents further
reaction and protects the surface. Immune metals, such
as gold, are not reactive under normal environmental
conditions. Most metals are active, and therefore ceramics are much more common than metals in the world.
Most of the key ceramics used for dentistry are oxides.
Ceramics may be classified on the basis of: (1) being
crystalline and/or noncrystalline, (2) being predominantly based on silica (Si0 2 ) and called silicates, (3) being
predominantly formed by metal reactions with oxygen
and called oxides, and/or (4) involving relatively simple
parent structures (main structures) or highly substituted
ones (derivative structures). Most ceramics are semicrystalline, silicates, oxides, and derivative structures (Fig.
4-3). Simple ceramic structures are more often ionically
bonded. More complicated structures generally involve
combinations of ionic and covalent bonding.
Polymers. Polymers are long molecules composed
principally of nonmetallic elements (e.g., C, O, N, H) that
are chemically bonded by covalent bonds. Their principal distinction from other common organic materials
is their large size, and thus, molecular weight. The process of forming a polymer from identifiable subunits,
monomers, is called polymerization (Fig. 4-4). Monomer
means "one unit"; polymer means "many units."
A common commercial and dental example is the polymerization of methyl methacrylate monomer (100 g/
mole) into methyl methacrylate polymer (typically
300,000 g/mole). Most polymers are named by adding
poly as a prefix to the word for the major monomer in
the polymer chain (e.g., polymethyl methacrylate) or

FIG 4-3 Schematic example of the microstructure of a multiphase semicrystalline ceramic. This microstructure is typical
for lab-processed feldspathic porcelins. Generally, the crystalli ne phase appears as islands within the noncrystalline phase.
Pores are included as typical defects in these structures.

by adding poly to the description of the chemical links
formed between monomer units (e.g., polyamide, polysaccharide, polyester, polyether, polyurethane). In other
cases, the original commercial brand name has become
the common name (e.g., Nylon, Teflon, Dacron, Plexiglas).
The large size and complexity of most polymers prohibits molecular scale organization that would produce
crystallization. Almost all polymers under normal circumstances are noncrystalline.
Polymers may be classified in terms of the kinetics of
their polymerization reaction. Chain reaction polymerization involves rapid monomer addition to growing chains.
Stepwise reaction polymerization occurs slowly by random
addition of monomers to any growing chain ends.
Acrylic monomers are widely used in dentistry and
undergo chain reaction polymerization. The stages of
chain reaction polymerization (Fig. 4-5) include: (1) activation (production of free radicals), (2) initiation (free
radical combination with a monomer unit to create the
beginning of a growing chain), (3) propagation (continued addition of monomer units), and (4) termination
(cancellation of the growing chain end by any one of
several possible events). The reaction kinetics of any step
may be quite complex and may be influenced by many
variables such as temperature, extent of reaction, or
method of initiation. Accelerators (chemical, light, or
heat) may be used to increase the rate of activation. Inhibitors or retarders (chemical) may be added to consume newly formed free radicals and prevent or postpone initiation. Once chain reaction polymerization has
started, the process may proceed at extremely high
speeds producing extensive release of heat. Methyl
methacrylate monomers combine to form polymer as
fast as 1,000,000 units per second.
Composites. Composites are physical mixtures (or
blends) of metals, ceramics, and/or polymers. The goal

FIG 4-4 Schematic example of a portion of a copolymer molecule formed from two different types (clear and solid) of
monomer units.

CHAPTER 4

is to blend the properties of the parts to obtain intermediate properties and to take advantage of best properties
of each phase. The classic mixture for dental restorations
involves ceramic particles mixed with a polymer matrix.
This is commonly called dental composite or composite.
Properties of composites can be explained readily in
terms of the volume fraction of the phases being physically mixed. This principle is called the rule-of-mixtures
and actually has wide application for all material. By
knowing the phases present in the structure of any material and the interfacial interactions, it is possible to
predict the overall properties fairly well.
Composites can be described as a dispersed (filler) phase
mixed into a continuous (matrix) phase. The matrix phase
is generally the phase that is transiently fluid during
manipulation or placement of the materials. It is also the
phase that tends to have the least desirable properties in
the mixture. As a general rule, minimizing the matrix of
any system produces materials with more desirable clinical

For a composite to distribute energy within
the system to all of the phases, it is important that the disproperties.

persed phase be bonded effectively to the continuous phase.

MATERIAL STRUCTURE
Traditionally, a material is defined in terms of its composition. However, the composition of a material only represents one of four important categories describing its
structure, and hence properties. The four structural categories are atomic arrangement, bonding, composition, and defects. Atomic arrangement may be crystalline (ordered) or
noncrystalline (disordered, glassy, amorphous). Primary
bonding may include metallic, ionic, and/or covalent
chemical bonds. Secondary bonding is much weaker and
may include van der Waals or hydrogen bonds. Com-

FIG. 4-5

Schematic representation of the four stages of chain
reaction polymerization (activation, initiation, propagation, and
termination) typical of free radical initiated acrylic systems. Each
stage has different reaction kinetics. Accelerators hasten free
radical formation. Retarders and inhibitors forestall initiation.

Dental Materials

includes the elemental components and the resulting phases that form. The defects encompass a wide
range of imperfections from those on the atomic scale to
voids or pores. The thermal and mechanical histories
position

strongly influence these structural categories, producing a
wide range of possible properties for the same overall chemical

Gold alloys will have different mechanical
properties if their defect concentrations are changed.
SiO, can be produced as a noncrystalline solid or as any
of three equilibrium crystalline solids (crystobalite,
tridymite, or quartz).
composition.

MATERIAL PROPERTIES
Properties are descriptions of a material's interactions
with the energy in its environment. The four common material property categories are physical, mechanical, chemical,

include mass
properties, thermal properties, electrical properties, optical properties, and surface properties. Mechanical properties include descriptions of stresses and strains within
a material as a result of an external force. Chemical properties include chemical and electrochemical interactions.
Biologic properties include characterization of toxicity or
sensitivity reactions during clinical use.
Physical Properties. Physical properties involve reversible interactions of a material with its environment.
A few of the more common physical properties are reviewed here with respect to important dental situations.
Metals, ceramics, polymers, and composites have both
different types and numbers of bonds. During temperature changes, therefore, they respond differently. During temperature increases, more frequent atomic motions stretch bonds and produce net expansion. During
temperature decreases, solids undergo contraction. The
relative rate of change is called the coefficient of thermal
expansion (or contraction). If it is referenced to a single dimension, called the linear coefficient of thermal expansion
(LCTE), symbolized by the Greek letter alpha (a). The
LCTE is expressed in units of inch/inch/F,
cm/cm/
°C, or ppm/°C. Because the rate of change is small, the
actual value is typically a multiple of 10 -6 cm/cm/°C
and is reduced to ppm/°C. Ceramics typically have an
LCTE from 1 to 15 ppm/°C. Metals typically have values from 10 to 30 ppm/°C. Polymers typically have
values from 30 to 600 ppm/°C. The LCTE of tooth structure is approximately 9 to 11 ppm/°C. It is important
that the LCTE of a restorative material be as near that of
tooth structure as possible. Important examples of values for dental materials are reported in Table 4-1.
One of the consequences of thermal expansion and
contraction differences between a restorative material
and adjacent tooth structure is percolation. This process is
typified by an intracoronal amalgam restoration. During
cooling, the amalgam contracts faster than tooth structure and recedes from the preparation wall, allowing the
ingress of oral fluids. During subsequent expansion, the
and biologic properties. Physical properties

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

fluid is expressed. Cyclic ingress and egress of fluids at
the restoration margin is called percolation (schematically presented in Fig. 4-6).
Other important physical properties involve heat flow
through materials. Enamel and dentin are primarily
composed of finely packed ceramic crystals (i.e., hydroxyapatite, Ca10[PO4]6[OH]2) that make those structures act as thermal insulators. If tooth structure is replaced by a metallic restoration, which tends to be a
thermal conductor, then it may be important to provide
thermal insulation to protect the dental pulp from rapid
increases or decreases in temperature in the mouth.
Generally, dental cements that may be used as bases unLinear Coefficients of Thermal
Expansion

From Bayne SC, Thompson JY: Biomaterials science, ed 7, Chapel Hill,
NC, 2000, Brightstar.
PFM, Porcelain-fused-to-metal; PMMA, polymethyl methacrylate.

FIG . 4-6

der metallic restorations act as insulators. One of the
advantages of a composite is low thermal conductivity.
Composites do not need liners/bases to provide thermal
insulation. Heat flow through a material is measured in
terms of either the relative rate of heat conduction (thermal conductivity) or the amount of heat conduction per
unit time (thermal diffusivity). Thermal diffusivity is the
more important property because it determines the
amount of heat flow per unit time toward the pulp
through a restoration. The dental pulp can withstand
small temperature changes (from 37° C up to 42° C)19,
212,273
for relatively short periods (30 to 60 seconds) without any permanent damage. Under most circumstances,
the microcirculation of the pulp transports the heat entering the pulp away to other parts of the body where
it is dissipated easily. However, extreme temperature
changes or extended times of exposure to high temperatures will cause pulpal changes.
Electrical conductivity is a measure of the relative rate of
electron transport through a material. This is important
for metallic restorations that easily conduct electricity. If
a galvanic cell (electrochemical cell) is present, then electrical current may flow, and that process would stimulate nerves in the pulp. This may occur accidentally, such
as when a tinfoil chewing gum wrapper contacts a cast
gold restoration and produces a minor electrical shock.
Mass properties of materials involve density or specific
gravity. Density is a material's weight (or mass) per unit
volume. Most metallic materials have relatively high
densities ranging from 6 to 19 g/cm3 . Ceramic densities
are typically 2 to 6 g/cm 3 . Polymer densities generally
range from 0.8 to 1.2 g/cm3 . Density is an important
consideration for certain dental processing methods such
as casting. Dense metal alloys are much easier to cast by
centrifugal casting methods. Density is important in estimating the properties of mixtures of different materials (composites) because the final properties of the mixture are proportional to the volume of mixed materials
(and not the weight). On occasion, the relative density
(or specific gravity) may be reported. Relative density is
the density of the material of interest compared with the

Percolation along the margins of an amalgam restoration due to its difference in linear
coefficient of thermal expansion from tooth structure during intraoral temperature changes.
Fluid influx occurs during cooling (contraction). Fluid efflux occurs during heating (expansion).

CHAPTER 4

density of water under a standard set of conditions. At
25° C at 1 atmosphere of pressure, the density of water
is 1 g/cm 3 . Therefore a specific gravity of 1.2 translates
into a density of 1.2 g/cm 3 under the same conditions.
Optical properties of bulk materials include interactions
with electromagnetic radiation (e.g., visible light) that
involve reflection, refraction, absorption (and fluorescence),
and/or transmission (Fig. 4-7). The radiation typically involves different intensities for different wavelengths (or
energies) over the range of interest (spectrum).
Any of these interactive events can be measured using a relative scale or an absolute scale. When the electromagnetic radiation is visible light, the amount of reflection can be measured in relative terms as gloss, or in
absolute terms as percent reflection. Visible light absorption can be measured in absolute terms as percent absorption (or transmission) for every wavelength (in the
visible spectrum). Color is a perception by an observer of
the distribution of wavelengths. The same color sensation may be produced by different absorption spectra
(metamerism). An individual's eye is capable of sensing
dominant wavelength, luminous reflectance (intensity),
and excitation purity. Variations among individuals'
abilities to sense these characteristics give rise to varying perceptions of color.
Color measurement techniques do not measure these
quantities directly. Color has traditionally been measured
using the Munsell color system in terms of hue, value, and
chroma. These terms correspond approximately to wavelength, intensity, and purity. The relationships of these

Dental Materials

quantities are represented schematically in Fig. 4-8. Shade
guides for matching restorative dental materials to tooth
structure are based on this system of describing color
(see Chapter 15). The quality of color also is measured by
the Commission Internationale de l'Eclairage (CIE) System as

FIG . 4-7

Schematic summary of interactions of electromagnetic radiation with materials. The color perceived by the observer is the result of several interactions between substrate
and incoming radiation producing reflection, internal scatteri ng, absorption, fluorescence, and transmission.

FIG 4-8

Munsell scale of hues, values, and
chromas in color space. (Adapted from Powers JM, Capp JA, Koran A: J Dent Res 56:
112-116, 1977.)

~
~
~

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

tristimulus values and reported as color differences (AL*,
delta a*, and delta b*) in comparison to standard conditions.
One should always remember that color is more than a
property of a material. It is coupled to the electromagnetic spectrum involved (and the relative intensity of every wavelength in the spectrum) and the perceptive abilities of the
observer. A practical example of the importance of the

spectrum and the observer would be the appearance of
anterior dental porcelain crowns in a nightclub in which
the lighting involves low-level fluorescent lamps. The
crowns fluoresce differently in that light and appear different from adjacent natural teeth, as compared with a
very natural appearance in full-spectrum visible daylight.
Radiation of still another wavelength may be preferentially absorbed (e.g., x-rays). Composites that contain
lithium, barium, strontium, or other good x-ray absorbers may appear radiopaque (radio-dense) in dental radiographs. Materials that are good absorbers (for whatever
form of radiation) are described as opaque.
The appearance of a dental restoration is a combination of events of surface reflection, absorption, and internal scattering. The scattering may simply deflect the path
of the radiation during transmission (refraction), or it may
internally reflect the radiation from varying depths back
out of a solid to the observer (translucency). Enamel naturally displays a high degree of translucency; therefore
translucency is a desirable characteristic for restorative
materials attempting to mimic enamel.
A wet tooth that is isolated from the wetting by saliva
soon has a transient whiter appearance. Most of this
shade change is due to the effect of loosely bound water
lost from subsurface enamel (by dehydration) between
hydroxyapatite crystals. This increases the internal scattering of light, with much of it reflected back to the observer (see internal reflection in Fig. 4-7). This probably
explains why it takes 15 to 20 minutes for the isolated
tooth to develop the whiter appearance, and 30 minutes
or more for it to regain its original appearance after isolation is terminated. Larmas and others showed that
0.8% to 1% by weight of pulverized moist enamel is exchangeable water, and that it can be removed at 4% relative humidity and 20° C.
Loosely bound water also
provides channels for diffusion through enamel of ions
and molecules (see Chapter 3).
The direction of radiation may be perturbed as it
crosses an interface from a medium of one type of optical character to another. Refractive index is the angle of
changed path for a standard wavelength of light energy
under standard conditions.
Another group of physical properties of great interest
is surface properties. Surfaces are important because all
restorative dental materials meet and interact with tooth
structure at a surface. Also, all dental surfaces interact
with intraoral constituents such as saliva and bacteria.
Changing a material's surface properties can mitigate
the extent of that interaction. The type of interaction be-

tween two materials at an interface is defined as the energy of interaction, and this is conveniently measured
for a liquid interacting with a solid under a standard set
The contact angle is
of conditions as the contact angle (θ).
the angle a drop of liquid makes with the surface on
which it rests (Fig. 4-9, A). This angle is the result of an
equilibrium between the surface tensions of the liquidgas interface ( γL)G,
solid-gas interface (ysc), and solidliquid interface (γsL).
These relationships can be expressed as an equation, as shown in Fig. 4-9, A. If the
energy difference of the two materials in contact is large,
then they will have a large contact angle. If the energy
difference is very small, then the contact angle will be
low and the liquid will appear to wet the solid by spreading. Wetting is a qualitative description of the contact
angle. Good wetting, or spreading, represents a low contact angle. Partial (poor) wetting describes a contact
angle approaching 90 degrees. Nonwetting is a contact
angle approaching 180 degrees (see Fig. 4-4, B).
It is very important that film formers such as varnishes, liners, cements, and bonding agents (all of which
are discussed later in this chapter) have good wetting on
tooth preparation surfaces on which these materials
may be placed, so that they adapt to the microscopic interstices of the surfaces. However, in other instances,
poor wetting may be an advantage. For example, experi mental posterior composites have been formulated to
have high contact angles to retard water and/or bacterial interactions. In most cases, wetting can be anticipated
on the basis of the hydrophilicity (water-loving) or hydrophobicity (water-hating) of materials. Hydrophilic surfaces are not wet well by hydrophobic liquids.
Mechanical Properties. The mechanical properties of
a material describe its response to loading. Although most
clinical situations involve complicated three-dimensional
loading situations, it is common to simply describe the
external load in terms of a single dimension (direction)
as compression, tension, or shear. Combinations of these can

FIG.4-9 Interfacial interactions of materials. A, Interaction
quantified as contact angle (see formula). B, Interaction described in terms of good wetting (spreading), partial (poor)
wetting, or nonwetting.

CHAPTER 4

produce torsion (twisting) orflexion (transverse bending).
These modes of loading are represented schematically
in Fig. 4-10, with respect to a simple cylinder and a mesioocclusal (MO) amalgam restoration. For testing purposes, often it is impossible to grip and pull a specimen
in tension without introducing other more complicated
stresses at the same time. To circumvent problems for
tensile testing of cylinders, it is possible to compress the
sides of a cylinder and introduce stresses equivalent to
tension. This variation of tension is called diametral tension (or diametral compression).
When a load is applied, the structure undergoes deformation as its bonds are compressed, stretched, or
sheared. The load-deformation characteristics are only
useful if the absolute size and geometry of the structure
involved are known. Therefore it is typical to normalize
load and deformation (in one dimension) as stress and
strain. Stress (abbreviated, Q) is load per unit of crosssectional area (within the material). It is expressed in
units of load/area (pounds/in2 = psi, or N/mm2 = MPa).
Strain (abbreviated e) is deformation (AL) per unit of
length (L). It is expressed in units of length/length (inch/
inch, or cm/cm), which is a dimensionless parameter. A
schematic summary is presented in Fig. 4-11. During loading, bonds are generally not compressed as easily as they
are stretched. Therefore materials resist compression
more readily and are said to be stronger in compression
than in tension. Materials have different properties un-

Dental Materials

der different directions of loading. It is important to determine what the clinical direction of loading is before
assessing the mechanical property of interest.
As loading continues, the structure is deformed. At
first this deformation (or strain) is completely reversible
(elastic strain). However, increased loading finally produces some irreversible strain as well (plastic strain),
which causes permanent deformation. The point of onset of plastic strain is called the elastic limit (proportional
limit, yield point). This is indicated on the stress-strain diagram (see Fig. 4-11) as the point at which the straight
line starts to become curved. Continuing plastic strain
ultimately leads to failure by fracture. The highest stress
before fracture is the ultimate strength (see Fig. 4-11, C).
The total plastic tensile strain at fracture is called the
elongation. This also may be expressed as the percent
elongation. Materials that undergo extensive plastic deformation before fracture are called ductile (in tension)
or malleable (in compression). Those that undergo very
little plastic deformation are called brittle.
The slope of the linear portion (constant slope) of the
stress-strain curve (from no stress up to the elastic limit)
is called the modulus, modulus of elasticity, Young's modulus, or the stiffness of the material, and is abbreviated as
E. It represents the amount of strain produced in response to each amount of stress. Ceramics typically
have much higher modulus values (high stiffness) than
polymeric materials (low stiffness). Because the slope of

FIG. 4-10 Examples of directions of loading. A, Uniaxial loading of cylinder. B, Uniaxial loading
of an MO amalgam restoration.

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

the line is calculated as the stress divided by the strain
(E =Q/e), modulus values have the same units as stress
(i.e., psi or MPa).
Two of the most useful mechanical properties are the modulus of elasticity and the elastic limit.

A restorative mater-

ial generally should be very stiff so that under load, its
elastic deformation will be extremely small. An exception is a Class V composite, which should be less stiff to
accommodate tooth flexure (see Microfill Composites in
Chapter 12). If possible, a material should be selected
for an application so that the stress level during function
usually will not exceed the elastic limit. If the stress exceeds the elastic limit a small amount, the associated
plastic deformation will tend to be very small. If the
stress is well beyond the elastic limit, then the resulting
deformation is primarily plastic strain, which at some
point will result in failure.
Often it is convenient to determine the elastic limit in
a relative manner by comparing the onset of plastic deformation of different materials using scratch or indentation tests, called hardness tests. The Mohs hardness
scale ranks scratch resistance of a material in comparison to a range of standard materials. The Mohs scale is
presented in Table 4-2. Rockwell, Brinell, and Knoop hardness tests employ indenters instead.
The energy that a material can absorb before the onset
of any plastic deformation is called its resilience (see Fig.
4-11, C), and is described as the area under the stressstrain curve up to the elastic limit. The total energy absorbed to the point of fracture is called the toughness and
is related to the entire area under the stress-strain curve
(see Fig. 4-11, C).
Mechanical events are both temperature and time dependent. These conditions must be carefully described
for any reported mechanical property. Generally, as the
temperature increases, the mechanical property values
decrease. The stress-strain curve appears to move to the
right and downward. The opposite occurs during cooling. As the rate of loading decreases, the mechanical
properties decrease. This is described as strain rate sensitivity and has important clinical implications. To momentarily make a material's behavior stiffer and/or
more elastic, strain it quickly. For recording undercut areas
in an elastic intraoral impression, remove it rapidly so that it
will be more elastic and more accurately record the absolute

This is an excellent example
of applied materials science.
Other time-dependent responses to stress or strain
also occur. Deformation over time in response to a constant stress is called creep (or strain relaxation). Materials
that are relatively weak or close to their melting temperature are more susceptible to creep. Dental wax deforms (creeps) under its own weight over short periods
of time. Traditional amalgam restorations are involved
in intraoral creep. Deformation over time in response to
a constant strain is called stress relaxation.
During loading, for all practical purposes, the strain
below the elastic limit is all elastic strain. The amount
of plastic strain is infinitesimal-so small that it is
ignored. However, during multiple cycles, these very
small amounts of plastic strain begin to accrue. After
dimensions of the structures.

FIG 4-11

Schematic summary of mechanical properties with
respect to amalgam restoration in function. A, Occlusal loadi ng of Class I amalgam restoration. B, Load/deformation curve
describing behavior of amalgam. C, Normalization of load/
deformation curve to stress-strain curve with important characteristics of curve indicated. (Mechanical responses depend
on temperature and strain rate involved.)

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

143

cosity, is the resistance to flow or stiffness of the liquid.
As the temperature is increased above the melting
point, the viscosity behavior tips down and toward the
right. A 37% phosphoric acid solution gel used for
etching displays pseudoplastic Bingham body behavior. It does not flow until a critical shear stress is exceeded, and as the shear stress is linearly increased, the
shear strain rate increases even more rapidly producing more flow.
Chemical Properties. Chemical properties of a material are those that involve changes in primary or secondary bonding. Primary bonding changes occur during

FIG 4-12 Fatigue curves. A, Relationship between single-cycle stress-strain and fatigue curves.
A typical fatigue curve separates characteristic regions (survival, fracture) and asymptomatically
l evels off at an endurance limit. B, Fatigue curves from compression testing for several commercial amalgams. A, Aristalloy; C, Cupralloy; D, Dispersalloy; E, Ease; N, New True Dentalloy;
P, Phasealloy; S, Sybralloy; T, Tytin; U, Cupralloy ESP (From Zardiackas LD, Bayne SC: Biomaterials 6:49-54, 1985.)

CHAPTER4

Dental Materials

FIG 4-13 Schematic summary of mechanical property behavi ors of liquids. The curves represent typical flow behaviors described as Newtonion, pseudoplastic, dilatant, and Bingham
body. (From Bayne SC, Taylor DF, Zardiackas LD: Biomaterials
science, ed 6, Chapel Hill, NC, 1992, Brightstar Publishing.)
chemical reactions and electrochemical reactions. Secondary bonding changes occur during processes such as
adsorption and absorption.
For metallic materials in the oral environment, the
principal changes in primary bonding occur as a result
of chemical corrosion (tarnish) or electrochemical corrosion.
Chemical corrosion involves direct reaction of species
by contact in solution or at an interface. An example of
this process is the sulfide tarnishing of silver in amalgams to produce a black surface film. Another example
is the oxidation of very high-copper-containing casting
alloys to produce a green patina.
For any material, a number of electrochemical corrosion processes may happen as well. Electrochemical corrosion involves two coupled chemical reactions (half
cells) at separate sites, connected by two paths. One
path (a circuit) is capable of transporting electrons, while
the other path (an electrolyte) is capable of transferring
metallic ions. 24-1 Therefore the basic components required
for any electrochemical cell are: (1) an anode (site of corrosion), (2) a cathode, (3) a circuit, and (4) an electrolyte
(Fig. 4-14).
Electrochemical corrosion occurs intraorally when
these four components are present. The conditions define which of the metallic sites acts as an anode. A number of types of electrochemical cells are possible. Examples are shown schematically in Fig. 4-15.
A number of these electrochemical cells are possible in
a single restorative dentistry situation. When an amalgam is in contact with a gold alloy restoration, galvanic,
local galvanic, crevice, and stress corrosion are possible.
Galvanic corrosion is associated with the presence of
macroscopically different electrode sites (amalgam and
gold alloy). Local galvanic corrosion (structure-selective corrosion) is due to the electrochemical differences of different phases in a single material (such as amalgam).
Electrochemical cells may arise whenever a portion of
the amalgam is covered by plaque or soft tissue. The covered area has a locally lowered oxygen and/or increased
hydrogen ion concentration, making it behave more like
an anode and corrode (concentration cell corrosion). Cracks

FIG . 4-14 Schematic representation of electrochemical cell.
(From Bayne SC, Taylor DF, Zardiackas LD: Biomaterials science, ed 6, Chapel Hill, NC, 1992, Brightstar.)
and crevices produce similar conditions and encourage
concentration cell corrosion. Both corrosion processes
are commonly termed crevice corrosion. When the restoration is under stress, the distribution of mechanical energy is not uniform and this produces different corrosion
potentials. This process is called stress corrosion.
Ceramics and polymers do not undergo chemical or
electrochemical corrosion in the same sense. Most of
their changes are related to chemical dissolution, absorption, or adsorption. Chemical dissolution normally occurs
as a result of the solubilization created by hydrogen
bonding effects of water and locally high acidity. Tooth
structure is dissolved by high concentrations of lactic
acid under plaque (see Chapter 3). Dental ceramics may
be dissolved by very acidic fluoride solutions (acidulated phosphate fluoride [APF]) used for protecting
outer layers of enamel against caries.
Sorption events include both adsorption (adding molecules to a surface by secondary bonding) or absorption
(penetration of molecules into a solid by diffusion). Protein adsorption alters the behavior and reactivity of dental material surfaces. Water absorption into dental polymers affects their mechanical properties.
Biologic Properties. Biologic properties of dental materials are concerned with toxicity and sensitivity reactions that occur both locally, within the associated tissue
and systemically. Most dental materials interface locally
with a variety of tissues (enamel, dentin, pulp, periodontium, cheek, tongue); thus local reactions may vary.
It is possible to evaluate local toxic effects on cells by
clinical pulp studies or by tissue culture tests. Unset materials may release cytotoxic components. However, in
clinical situations this problem is rarely evident. Two
important clinical factors determining toxicity are the
exposure time and the concentration of the potentially
toxic substance. Generally, restorative materials harden
quickly and/or are not readily soluble in tissue fluids.

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

FIG 4-15 Types of electrochemical cells. Dotted regions
i ndicate anodic material being lost during corrosion.
(From Tomashov ND: Theory of corrosion and protection
of metals, ed 1, New York, 1966, Macmillan.)

Therefore potentially toxic products do not have time to
diffuse into tissues. Even more importantly, the concentration makes the poison! Some authorities believe that if
the amount of material involved is small, then the pulp
or other tissues can transport and excrete it without significant biochemical damage. Others believe there is no
threshold. A threshold level for toxicity is one below
which no effect can be detected.
Systemic changes due to biomaterial interactions
have been very difficult, if not impossible, to monitor.
Most evidence of biocompatibility has come from longterm usage and indirect monitoring. This is an area of increasing concern for understanding potential risks of new or
alternative restorative dental materials.

Finally, toxicology is undergoing rapid evolution. In
the 1970s most toxicologic screening involved the use of
the Ames test for determining mutagenicity The inventor of that test has now withdrawn support for the conclusions derived from that screening procedure.'o ,s9
Therefore results from earlier screening tests of dental
materials may have to be reconsidered.

BIOMECHANICS FOR
RESTORATIVE DENTISTRY
Teeth are subjected to many forces during normal use.
The interactions between the applied forces, the shape
and structure of teeth, the supporting structures, and
the mechanical properties of tooth components and

restorative materials are all included in the subject of
biomechanics. Biomechanics is the study of loads (or
stresses) and deformations (or strains) occurring in biologic systems.
The biomechanical behavior of restored teeth can be
studied at any level from gross to microscopic. Examples of situations of interest include the calculation of
stress transfer to the margin of an amalgam restoration,
from the amalgam to tooth structure, from tooth structure to the periodontal ligament, from several teeth to
bone, and throughout bone. The most common analysis
focuses on stress transfer at the interface between a
restoration and tooth structure.

BIOMECHANICAL UNIT
The standard biomechanical unit involves the: (1) restorative material, (2) tooth structure, and (3) interface
(interfacial zone) between the restoration and tooth. Different restorative procedures can involve very different
interfaces. Composite /enamel interfaces are micromechanically bonded. Amalgam/enamel interfaces are weak
and discontinuous unless a bonding system is used. Cemented crown/enamel interfaces are weak but are continuous. The importance of considering three structures
in the biomechanical unit is to detect stresses that may
cause unwanted fractures or debonding. The restorative
material may be strong enough to resist fracture, but the
interface or tooth structure may not be.

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

STRESS TRANSFER
Normal tooth structure transfers external biting loads
through enamel into dentin as compression (Fig. 4-16,
A). The concentrated external loads are distributed over
a large internal volume of tooth structure and thus local
stresses are lower. During this process, a small amount
of dentin deformation may occur that results in tooth
flexure. These deformations are discussed more carefully in the following section.
A restored tooth tends to transfer stress differently
than an intact tooth. Any force on the restoration produces compression, tension, or shear along the tooth/
restoration interface. 110,111 Once enamel is no longer continuous, its resistance is much lower. Therefore most restorations are designed to distribute stresses onto sound
dentin, rather than to enamel (Fig. 4-16, B) .160 Once in
dentin the stresses are resolved in a manner similar to a
normal tooth. The process of stress transfer to dentin becomes more complicated when the amount of remaining dentin is thin and the restoration must bridge a significant distance to seat onto thicker dentin (see Liners
and Bases).
For an amalgam restoration in a pulpally deep tooth prepa-

a total of 1 to 2 mm of underlying dentin and/or
other insulating material is preferred pulpal of the amalgam to provide adequate thermal and mechanical protection of the pulp. 194 If inadequate thickness of dentin remains, the insertion of an insulating liner or base is
recommended. However, it may be necessary sometimes to
ration,

ensure that the amalgam restoration is "seated" on sound
dentin at three or more widely separated areas at the level of

FIG .4-16 Schmatic view of occlusal l oading of amalgam
restorations. A, Stress transfer into an unrestored tooth occurs
through dental enamel into dentin. B, Stress transfer into a
tooth restored with dental amalgam is conducted through
enamel and the restoration to be distributed within dentin
( and not enamel). Note the facial and lingual seats at initial
cavity preparation at the pulpal wall level (before removal of
remaining infected dentin and placement of base) that help
transfer stresses laterally.

This provides optimal stress transfer. For a nonmetallic restoration,
which has better insulating properties than a metallic
one, 0.5 to 1 mm of dentin and/or liner or base is sufficient for thermal and mechanical protection.
the initial tooth preparation pulpal wall.

STRAIN WITHIN TOOTH STRUCTURE
( TOOTH FLEXURE)
Teeth are not rigid structures. They undergo deformation (strain) during normal loading."' Intraoral loads
(forces) vary widely and have been reported to range
from 10 to 431 N (1 N = 0.225 lb of force), with a functional load of 70 N considered clinically normal .9" Obviously, the number of teeth, type of occlusion, and occlusal habits of patients, such as bruxism, affect the load
per tooth.
The amount of strain is roughly proportional to the
amount of stress. However, because tooth structure is
heterogeneous and asymmetric and its properties change
with time, there is no simple description of the state of
stress or amount of strain. To date, increasing evidence
indicates that the amount of strain and its effect on tooth
structure may be very important in fatigue.
Tooth flexure has-been described as either a lateral
bending or an axial bending of a tooth during occlusal
loading."" This flexure produces the maximal strain in
the cervical region, and the strain appears to be resolved
in tension or compression within local regions, sometimes causing the loss of bonded Class V restorations in
preparations with no retention grooves (Fig. 4-17). More
over, one current hypothesis is that tensile or compressive
strains gradually produce microfractures 91,95,113 (called abfractions by some authors) in the thinnest region of enamel
at the cementoenamel junction (CEJ) (Fig. 4-18). Such
fractures predispose enamel to loss when subjected to
toothbrush abrasion and/or chemical erosion. This process may be key in the formation of some Class V defects (Figs. 4-19 and 4-20). Additionally, in unbonded or
leaking restorations, this flexure of the dentin also may
produce changes in fluid flow and microleakage, leading to sensitivity and pulpal inflammation, respectively
(see Chapter 2). These events are just beginning to be
documented carefully.
EFFECTS OF AGING
As a tooth becomes older, it undergoes changes in structural mass and in the character of the remaining tissue.
Older teeth have lost most prismless enamel along the
outer surface and may have encountered numerous microfractures in cervical portions, as just discussed. In response to disease assaults, such as caries or other external stimuli, odontoblastic processes may have laid down
more peritubular dentin occluding the outer zones of
dentinal tubules."-' Peritubular dentin is mostly hydroxyapatite and tends to stiffen dentin. Secondary and reparative dentin also may have been produced, replacing

CHAPTER4

Dental Materials

FIG 4-17 Schematic diagram of tooth flexure creating cervical stresses. A, Lateral flexure results
from eccentric forces that produce tensile stresses at marginal interface with cervical restoration
placed in facial CEJ region. B, Barreling results from heavy centric forces that produce compressive
stresses along marginal interface with cervical restoration in entire CEJ region, resulting in lateral
displacement (loss) of the restoration. (From Heymann HO et al: J Am Dent Assoc 122:41-47, 1991.)

FIG 4-18 Schematic view of microfractures developing between enamel rods in cervical enamel. The enamel near the
j unction of the CEJ and DEJ is prismless. (From Lee WC,
Eakle WS: J Prosthet Dent 52:374-380, 1984.)

F I G . 4-19 Picture of Class V lesion suspected of arising by tooth flexure. (Courtesy Stephen C.
Bayne, School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.)

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

much strain. Lower modulus materials undergo dangerous strains where stresses are concentrated, unless
there is adequate thickness. The resistance to strain increases approximately as the third power of the thickness of the material involved. Doubling the thickness increases the resistance to elastic strain by ninefold. If the
local stress does exceed the material's elastic limit, then
the capacity for plastic deformation before fracture will
determine when fracture actually occurs.
These principles can be demonstrated easily using the
case of a mesioocclusodistal (MOD) restoration in a first
molar. A low modulus material, such as amalgam, must
have sufficient thickness to resist flexural deformation
that would produce fracture in this brittle material. Increased amalgam thickness improves its resistance to
flexure but compromises the resistance of the remaining
dentin and base floor for the restoration. However, properly prepared and condensed amalgam in a proper
tooth preparation that provides the recommended occlusopulpal restoration thickness serves for many years
without fracture.

DIRECT RESTORATIVE
DENTAL MATERIALS

FIG . 4-20 Schematic view of Class V cervical defects comparing
shallow saucer-shaped lesions to deep notch-shaped lesions.
Angulation is determined by average slope of walls and not
walls at perimeter of the lesion. (From Bayne SC et al: J Dent
Res 71A:314, 1992 !abstract 16691.)
some of the pulp chamber and canals. Evidence is also
strong that with aging, all type I collagen in the human
body becomes more cross-linked.z'° A strong suspicion is
that this process of cross-linking makes the intertubular
dentin more brittle. Therefore it is logical that the modulus of teeth is observed to increase with aging (50% increase from 20 to 29 years of age, to 40 to 49 years of age)
and that teeth behave in a more brittle fashion." This alteration, coupled with microcracks that may have developed with fatigue, may produce large cracks or fractures
in the tooth over time. Supporting bone may also undergo property changes with age .76
These changes produce a substrate that may not
transfer stress as readily and that may no longer be well
matched to the properties of a restorative material that
has survived for a long time. The complete implication
of these changes is not yet fully understood.

PRINCIPLES OF BIOMECHANICS
Stress transfer and the resulting deformations of structures are principally governed by (1) the elastic limit of
the materials, (2) the ratio of the elastic moduli involved, and (3) the thickness of the structures. Materials
with a high elastic modulus transfer stresses without

Loss of tooth structure to caries or other processes usually proceeds in a gradual way. Therefore a patient's
initial encounter with a dentist often involves the restoration of a small portion of tooth structure that is defective. This can be accomplished relatively easily by
designing a tooth preparation with retention features
and restoring it with a pliable material that is capable of
hardening in situ. While in a moldable stage, the material can be adapted to the tooth structure and shaped to
re-create normal anatomic contours. This process is called
direct restorative dentistry because it is accomplished directly in the intraoral environment. The development or
selection of materials for direct application may require
compromise of mechanical properties or other desired
characteristics. If there is extensive loss of tooth structure, then the restorative materials must provide better
stress distribution characteristics and be more carefully
bonded to remaining tooth structure. In most cases, this
requires the use of materials that cannot be made fluid
for direct use. These materials must be fabricated into a
restoration outside of the mouth and cemented or bonded
in place. The procedures involved with this approach
are categorized as indirect restorative dentistry.

AMALGAM
Terminology. Amalgam technically means an alloy of
mercury (Hg) with any other metal. Dental amalgam is
an alloy made by mixing mercury with a silver-tin dental amalgam alloy (Ag-Sn). In dentistry, it is common to
use the term amalgam to mean dental amalgam.
Amalgam alloy is a silver-tin alloy to which varying
amounts of copper (Cu) and small amounts of zinc (Zn)

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

Composition and Classification of Dental Amalgam Alloy Powders'

From Osborne Met al: J Dent Res 57:983-988,1978; and Vriihoef MMA, Vemeersch AG, Spanauf AJ:
*Elements in the composition are reported in weight percent.

have been added. Low-copper amalgam alloys contain 2%
to 5% copper. The earliest successful amalgams were
made by combining filings of such alloys with mercury.
A typical modern low-copper amalgam alloy may contain 69.4% Ag, 26.2% Sn, 3.6% Cu, and 0.8% Zn (Table
4-3). Amalgams made from such low-copper alloy filings are often referred to as conventional amalgams. Highcopper amalgam alloys contain 12% to 30% copper, and
because of their higher copper content, they display significantly better corrosion resistance than low-copper
amalgams. A typical high-copper amalgam alloy may
contain 60% Ag, 27% Sn, 13% Cu, and 0% Zn (see Table
4-3). The particles of these alloys that are mixed with
mercury may be filings, but they are often small spheres.
Amalgam is mixed for use by combining amalgam alloy particles with mercury, vigorously mixing the components (trituration) for a few seconds during the initial
reaction, placing the plastic mass into a tooth preparation, compressing the mixture (condensation) to remove
the excess mercury-rich phase, and then carving and
finishing the hardening mass.
Because of a concern about the possible toxicity of mercury in amalgams, a number of materials have been developed as amalgam alternatives. Amalgam alternatives 117
comprise any materials (e.g., composite, glass ionomer,
cast gold alloys) that can be used to restore a tooth instead
of using amalgam. Amalgam substitutes (e.g., cast gold
alloys) are materials generally considered to have equal
or better properties than the amalgam restoration they replace. Most are compositions that contain some of the
components of amalgam (e.g., Ag-Sn alloy particles), but
they do not contain mercury. Gallium alloys are an example of such a substitute made with Ag-Sn particles in
Ga-In. 180,232,253 Gallium melts at 28° C and can be used to
produce liquid alloys at room temperature by the addition
of small amounts of other elements such as indium. In this
case, Ga-In has been substituted for Hg in amalgam. Other
systems that use Au mixed with other noble metals to
form the restoration matrix are being explored . 261

Dental amalgam,

Chicago, 1980, Quintessence.

The American Dental Association, in combination
with the National Institute on Standards and Technology
( ADA-NIST), has patented a mercury free direct filling
alloy based on Ag-coated Ag-Sn particles that can be selfwelded by compaction (hand-consolidated) to create a
restoration. This approach is being proposed as an alternative to amalgam.
Other transitional approaches include redesigning
amalgam to have much less initial mercury. If alloy particle sizes are judiciously chosen to pack together well,
it is possible to minimize the mercury required for mixing to the 15% to 25% range. The actual clinical properties of these low-mercury amalgams are not yet known.
Classification. The major approaches to classification
of amalgams and the amalgam alloys on which they are
based are in terms of (1) amalgam alloy particle geometry
and size, (2) copper content, and (3) zinc content. Each of
these is discussed subsequently in a historical context.
In the 1830s, amalgam alloy was obtained by filing or
grinding silver coins into coarse particles to mix with
mercury. The compositions were inconsistent at best
and the reaction conditions were quite variable. This process could not reliably produce a final amalgam with uniform properties. During the 1860s and 1870s, Townsend,
Flagg, and others contributed immensely to investigations of composition versus properties. However, true
amalgam science began with investigations by GV Black
during the 1890s. Traditional (or conventional) amalgam
alloys were produced by early dental manufacturers,
such as S.S. White, and predominated from 1900 until
1970. The basic composition was 65% Ag, 30% Sn, 5% Cu,
and less than 1% Zn.
Traditional amalgam was mixed initially by proportioning alloy and mercury components into a mortar
and then grinding the mixture with a pestle. The process of manual mixing is known as trituration. Alloy was
manufactured in bricks that were ground with a file into
filings and mixed with mercury. A more efficient process
was grinding up the ingot of alloy, typically on a lathe.

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

For that reason, those particles became known as lathecut particles (Fig. 4-21). Filings were irregular in shape
and gradually were produced in finer and finer sizes by
manufacturers to control the reaction, produce smoother
mixtures, and enhance final properties. Lathe-cut particles could be purchased in regular cut, fine cut, and microfine cut versions. Conventional amalgam alloys were
commonly classified on this basis of particle size.

Irregular powder particles pack together relatively
poorly (see Fig. 4-21, A) and require a relatively large
amount of mercury (50% to 60% by weight in the mixture) to fill in the spaces. After transfer of the mixture to
the tooth preparation, it is possible to compact the mass
and extrude some of the mercury-rich matrix. By eliminating the mercury-rich matrix as much as possible, the
amount of reaction product matrix that forms is limited,

FIG . 4-21 Examples of amalgam alloy powder particles. A, Fili ngs (New True Dentalloy). B, Spheres (Cupralloy). C, Mixed
geometries (Dispersalloy). (Courtesy Stephen C. Bayne, School
of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.)

thereby improving the overall properties of the set
amalgam. Mercury-rich mixtures, after trituration but
before placement into the preparation, historically could
be partially condensed by wringing the mass in a squeeze
cloth. In the 1960s, Eames was the first to promote a low
mercury-to-alloy mixing ratio (Eames technique or nosqueeze-cloth technique).'° Later, it was demonstrated that
by spherodizing the alloy particles,b' the particles
packed more efficiently (see Fig. 4-21, B) and required
much less mercury to make a practical mixture. Spherical particles also increased the fluidity of the mixture by
presenting less resistance to particle sliding. Using some
or all spherical alloy particles, it is possible to reduce the
mercury portion of the mixture to less than 50% by
weight. The distinction between irregular (lathe-cut)
and spherical particle geometries became the next major
basis for classification of amalgam alloys. Most modern
precapsulated amalgams are formulated with only 42%
to 45% mercury by weight.
During the early part of the twentieth century, alloy
powder and mercury were proportioned crudely and

f I G 4-22 Earlier methods of dental trituration. A, Equipment
for hand mixing of alloy powder and mercury in mortar and
pestle using excess mercury (circa 1900 to 1940). B, Equipment for mixing of alloy pellets and controlled mercury in
reusable capsules with mechanical mixing in amalgamator
(circa 1940 to 1970).

CHAPTER 4

mixed manually (Fig. 4-22, A). To proportion and mix
amalgam more carefully, manufacturers later recommended the use of alloy pellets, mercury dispensers,
reusable mixing capsules and pestles, and amalgamators
(Fig. 4-22, B). A typical reusable capsule (Fig. 4-23, A)
was a hollow tube with rounded ends constructed as
two pieces that could be friction-fit or screwed together.
Amalgam alloy was dispensed into the capsule as a pellet of pressed powder of standard weight. Mercury was
dispensed into the capsule as a standard-sized droplet
from an automatic dropper bottle. A small metal or
plastic pestle (Fig. 4-23, B) was added to the capsule and
it was closed. The capsule and its contents were then
automatically mixed using an amalgamator. The typical
amalgamator has been designed to grasp the ends of
the capsule in a claw that is oscillated in a figure-eight
pattern. This accelerates the mixture toward each end
of the capsule during each throw and impacts the mixture with the pestle.
To guarantee that amalgam alloy and mercury are
mixed both efficiently and consistently, it is very important to periodically calibrate amalgamators. After several years of use, the bearings become worn and the
mixes no longer are sufficiently triturated. On standard
electric amalgamators (Fig. 4-24, A), the trituration speed
and trituration time are manually set on the front of the
equipment. Settings vary for different products. Electronic amalgamators (Fig. 4-24, B) have digital controls
and permit programming of settings.

Dental Materials

Modern amalgams are produced from precapsulated
alloy and mercury. The components are separated in the
capsule by a special diaphragm that is broken when the
capsule is "activated" just before mixing (Fig. 4-25). Precapsulated (preproportioned) amalgam (see Fig. 4-25, A)
provides convenience and some degree of assurance
that the materials will not be contaminated before use or
spilled before mixing. Mercury hygiene is an important
consideration for safe amalgam management and is discussed later in this section.
During the 1960s, major research emphasis was placed
on the benefits of increased copper contents in amalgams. It was confirmed that increasing the copper content
above 12% by weight in the amalgam alloy effectively suppressed formation of the phase (Sn-Hg), which was prone to intraoral corrosion. A dramatic improvement in corrosion

resistance led to a doubling or tripling of clinical longevity of these amalgams. Flagg originally explored the
effect of copper in the 1860s, but the copper was not effectively prealloyed with silver and/or tin. Thus the effect was not demonstrated. In the 1930s, Gayler again

A

A

B

B

FIG 4-23 Capsules and pestles for automatically mixing amalgam constituents using amalgamator. A, Reusable capsules.
B, Magnified view of pestles.

FIG . 4-24 Examples of dental amalgamators for automatically
mixing amalgam in capsules (shown with protective cover
open on equipment). A, Amalgamator with manually set trituration speeds and times. B, Amalgamator with digital controls
and programming for trituration speeds and times.

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

of this residual zinc was that moisture contamination
before setting converted the zinc to zinc oxide and produced hydrogen gas that could expand the amalgam excessively, resulting in patient pain. Once the mechanism
of delayed expansion was understood, care during amalgam manipulation prevented this problem. Some manufacturers also produced nonzinc amalgams as an alternative. These alloys often were favored where isolation
was difficult. It now seems as though zinc may have some
beneficial effect on amalgam longevity. Clinical research evidence
supports that zinc-containing low-copper
and high-copper amalgams may last 20% to 50% longer
than zinc-free ones. On the basis of this new evidence,
amalgams continue to be produced and designated as zinc
(zinc-containing) or nonzinc (zinc-free), although improved manufacturing techniques have largely eliminated the original need for zinc as a manufacturing aid.
Composition, Structure, and Properties. Examples
of compositions and structure of amalgams of all types are
summarized in Table 4-3. The principal considerations for
any amalgam are the amount of mercury in the final restoration and the types of reaction products formed.
Conventional amalgam sets by the reaction of Ag and Sn
F I G . 4-25 Preproportioned alloy and mercury in prepackaged
capsules ("precapsulated") for mixing amalgam constituents
using amalgamator. A, Examples of preproportioned capsule
designs. B, Schematic of preproportioned capsule showing
mercury and powder separated by septum that must be perforated before mixing. (From Rinne VW.. J Dent Res 62:116117, 1983.)

investigated the effect of copper and found that in the
coarse filing alloys of that time, copper contents above
6% produced excessive expansion, and the corrosionreducing effect at higher copper contents was not realized.
Also in the 1930s, early pioneers were admixing copper
amalgams with amalgams to produce very corrosionresistant compositions. However, the setting times of the
mixtures were slow and the compositions were quite
variable. It was not until Innes and Youdelis added
Ag-Cu spheres to conventional amalgam alloy, with the
intent of producing dispersion-hardened amalgams,
that the advantageous effect of copper on corrosion resistance was clearly observed.
Classification of amalgams based on copper content is the
main system in use today (see Table 4-3). High-copper

amalgams can be produced from amalgam alloy particles that are irregular and/or spherical.
Another important additive to amalgam alloy is zinc.
Originally zinc was added to conventional amalgams as
a processing aid to suppress oxidation of the key elements in the alloy. Zinc tends to oxidize preferentially
forming a zinc oxide film that covers the surface of liquid alloy during manufacture and suppresses oxidation
of other elements. Generally, 1% or more is added to accomplish this end. However, some (0.2% to 1%) is left in
the amalgam alloy at the end. A detrimental side effect

from Ag-Sn particles with mercury to produce two reaction product phases, a Ag-Hg phase and a Sn-Hg phase.
These form solids and cause the mass to harden. The metallurgic reaction is very complicated and is influenced by
several variables. Schematically, the reaction is summarized in a simple way in Fig. 4-26. Because the original
mixture contains a large excess of Ag-Sn alloy particles,
only a minor portion of the outside of the particles is consumed during the reaction with mercury. The unreacted
portion of the original amalgam alloy particles remains
as residual alloy particles, reinforcing the final structure.
Reaction products form a matrix surrounding the residual alloy particles. Because the residual alloy particles
have physical, chemical, and mechanical properties that
are significantly better than those of the reaction products, it is important to minimize the amount of matrix
that forms during the reaction. Depending on the geometry and packing of the amalgam alloy particles, different
amounts of mercury will be required to initially create a
condensable mixture. After the reaction begins and the
amalgam has been placed in the tooth preparation, it is
important to compress (condense) the mixture to reduce
voids in the material, adapt it closely to the tooth preparation walls, and express excess mercury-rich matrix.
The mercury-rich matrix is removed from the surfaces
of condensed material increments. This process ensures
that the final structure is composed predominantly of reinforcing residual alloy within a minimum of reaction
product matrix. This is exemplified in Fig. 4-27. The matrix phase of a well-condensed spherical dental amalgam
is seen as a polished cross-section. The cracked surface
can be seen only propagating through the matrix phase
while following a tortuous path around the strong residual spherical alloy particles.

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

B

Schematic summary of setting reaction of amalgam and its associated microstructure.
A, Before reaction, alloy particles are dispersed in mercury. B, After reaction, residual alloy particles are embedded in matrix of crystalline reaction products. Only a small percentage of individual powder particles is required to completely react with mercury. (Modified from Bayne SC,
Barton RE. In Richardson RE, Barton RE, editors: The dental assistant, ed 6, Philadelphia, 1988,
FIG . 4-26

Lea & Febiger.)

Picture of Tytin restoration fracture surface and polished cross-section showing that
fatigue failure cracks proceed through the matrix phase and around the stronger residual alloy
particle phase. Greater condensation during placement reduces the amount of matrix, making
the path for fatigue crack propagation more tortuous during clinical service and prolonging the
service life of the restoration. (Courtesy Stephen C. Bayne, School of Dentistry, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.)

FIG 4-27

The major reaction product phases of Ag-Hg and SnHg are approximately Ag2Hg3 and Sn,_,Hg, and are nonstoichiometric. In metallurgic terminology, the original
alloy is designated as gamma phase (y) and the reaction
product phases are called gamma-one (y,) and gamma-two
(y2), respectively.
Ag-Hg (gamma-one) crystals are generally small and
equiaxed. Most of the matrix is Ag-Hg. That phase
has intermediate corrosion resistance. Sn-Hg (gammatwo) reaction product crystals are long and bladelike,
penetrating throughout the matrix. Although they con-

stitute less than 10% of the final composition, they
form a penetrating matrix because of intercrystalline
contacts between the blades. That image is reinforced
by the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) picture of
Sn-Hg crystals in Fig. 4-28. This phase is prone to corrosion in clinical restorations, a process that proceeds
from the outside of the amalgam, along the crystals,
connecting to new crystals at intercrystalline contacts.
This produces penetrating corrosion that generates a porous and spongy amalgam with minimal mechanical
resistance.

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

Two key features of this degradation process are the
corrosion-prone character of the Sn-Hg phase and the
connecting path formed by the bladelike geometry of
the crystals. Both of these are eliminated by the use of
more copper in the initial composition.
High-copper amalgams set in a manner similar to
low-copper amalgams except that Sn-Hg reactions are

FIG 4-28

SEM view of Sn-Hg (y2) crystals that occur in matrix
of set low-copper amalgams. (Note the bladelike crystals that
penetrate amalgam and touch each other to create continuous
matrix.)

FIG 4-29

suppressed by the preferential formation of Cu-Sn phases
instead. Cu-Sn phases that are part of the set amalgam matrix are much less corrosion-prone than the Sn-Hg phase they
replace. The Cu-Sn phases are still the most corrosion-

prone ones in the amalgam. However, when they corrode, penetrating corrosion does not occur because individual crystals generally are not connected.
Both low-copper and high-copper amalgams undergo
two kinds of corrosion, chemical corrosion and electrochemical corrosion (Fig. 4-29 and Table 4-4). Chemical corrosion occurs most notably on the occlusal surface and
produces a black Ag-S tarnish film (Fig. 4-30). This reaction is limited to the surface and does not compromise
any properties, except for esthetics. Those amalgams
with very high levels of copper also are capable of producing a copper oxide patina, but that is relatively uncommon. Electrochemical corrosion is an important
mechanism of amalgam corrosion and has the potential
to occur virtually anywhere on or within a set amalgam.
Electrochemical corrosion occurs whenever chemically
different sites act as an anode and cathode (see Chemical Properties). This requires that the sites be connected
by an electrical circuit in the presence of an electrolyte,
typically saliva. The anode corrodes, producing soluble
and insoluble reaction products.
If an amalgam is in direct contact with an adjacent
metallic restoration such as a gold crown, the amalgam is
the anode in the circuit. This type of electrochemical corrosion is called galvanic corrosion and is associated with

Examples of sites susceptible to electrochemical and chemical corrosion on amalgams: galvanic corrosion (a) at interproximal contact with metallic restoration such as gold casti ng alloy; local galvanic (b) corrosion on occlusal surface at grain boundaries between different
metallic phases; crevice corrosion (c) at margin due to lower pH and oxygen concentration of
saliva; crevice corrosion (d) under retained interproximal plaque due to lower local pH; crevice
corrosion (e) within unpolished scratches or detailed secondary anatomy; chemical corrosion (f)
of occlusal surface with sulfide ions in saliva, producing surface tarnish.

CHAPTER 4

the presence of macroscopically different electrode sites.
The same process may occur microscopically (local galvanic corrosion or structure selective corrosion) because
of the electrochemical differences of different phases.
Residual amalgam alloy particles act as the strongest cathodes. Sn-Hg or Cu-Sn reaction product phases are the
strongest anodes in low-copper and high-copper amalgams, respectively. Local electrochemical cells also may

Dental Materials

arise whenever a portion of the amalgam is covered by
plaque or soft tissue. The covered area has a locally lowered oxygen and/or higher hydrogen ion concentration,
making it behave more anodically and corrode. Cracks and
crevices produce similar conditions and preferentially
corrode (concentration cell corrosion or crevice corrosion).
Regions within an amalgam that are under stress also
display a greater propensity for corrosion (stress corrosion).

Examples of Intraoral Situations for Which Electrochemical and Chemical Corrosion (Tarnish)
Would Occur

FIG 4-30 Clinical example of tarnished occlusal surface of amalgam restoration. (Courtesy
Stephen C. Bayne, School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.)

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

For an occlusal amalgam, the greatest combination of
corrosion and mechanical stresses occurs along margins. Therefore most visible changes are associated with
margins. These are discussed subsequently in detail.
During electrochemical corrosion of low-copper amalgams, the Sn-Hg phase is oxidized into Sn-O and/or
Sn-O-Cl.145,146 The oxychloride species is soluble. The oxide precipitates as crystals and tends to fill up the spaces
occupied by the original Sn-Hg phase. Along the margins of the amalgam, Sn-O helps seal the space against
microleakage (Fig. 4-31). Amalgam has a linear coefficient of thermal expansion that is 2.5 times greater than
tooth structure, and it does not bond to tooth structure
(unless an amalgam bonding agent is used). Therefore,
during expansion and contraction, percolation could
otherwise occur along the external walls (see Fig. 4-6) if
corrosion products did not impede fluid ingress and
egress along the margins.
Electrochemical corrosion of Sn-Hg does not appear to
release free mercury into the oral environment. Rather,

mercury immediately reacts with locally available Ag
and Sn from residual amalgam alloy particles and is reconsumed to form more reaction products. Electrochemical corrosion of Cu-Sn in high-copper amalgams
produces both copper and tin oxides and oxychlorides,
but no mercury is involved in the process. Electrochemical
corrosion is not a mechanism of mercury liberation from set
amalgam.

Principal mechanical properties of amalgam are reported in Table 4-5 and include values for compressive
strength, tensile strength, and creep. The compressive
strengths of high-copper amalgams are greater than those
of low-copper amalgams because of the presence of the
copper phases. High-copper amalgams have compressive strengths that range from 380 to 550 MPa (55,000
to 80,000 psi) and are very similar to those of enamel and
dentin. Therefore dental manufacturers do not place
much emphasis on increasing these values. Tensile
strength is important for fracture resistance. Both lowand high-copper amalgams have low tensile strengths,

FIG . 4-31 Marginal sealing by corrosion products. A, SEM cross-sectional view of Sn-O corrosion products sealing amalgam (A) margin along enamel wall (T). B, Elemental map of Sn to
demonstrate high concentration of Sn (see large white areas) within amalgam near interface
with tooth. C, Densely packed Sn-CI crystals within pores of retrieved conventional amalgam
restoration. D, Sn-O polyhedra and Sn-O-CI brush-heap crystals on amalgam surface after corrosion. (A and B, From Port RM, Marshall GW. J Am Dent Assoc 110:491-495,1985,-C, From Marshall
SJ, Marshall GW, Jr: J Dent Res 59:820-823, 1980; D, From Marshall GW, Sarkar, Greener EH:
J Dent Res 54:904, 1975.)

CHAPTER

but high-copper amalgam is lower overall. This is important because it is very likely that most intraoral loading
conditions produce tensile stresses along the occlusal surface and at the margins. During direct contact by opponent teeth, cusps and/or amalgam restorations are
stretched laterally, producing tension and perhaps flexion
(see Fig. 4-10, B and D). Amalgams that are corroded or
have inadequate bulk to distribute stresses may fracture.
At margins, where amalgams are thinner, extrusion may
have occurred, and corrosion may have compromised the
integrity of the amalgam, fracture is even more likely.
Amalgam is generally considered a brittle material.
It is not capable of much plastic deformation before
fracture when stressed at moderate-to-high strain rates,
such as during vigorous chewing. Therefore traumatic
stresses during chewing can produce fracture in an amalgam
without sufficient bulk. In contrast, at slow strain rates

such as expansion caused by phase changes or corrosion, amalgam (particularly low-copper amalgam) is
capable of clinically significant plastic deformation
(creep), even though the stresses are well below the
elastic limit.

FIG 4-32 Clinical photograph of Class V amalgam restoration
being extruded by mercuroscopic expansion.

4

Dental Materials

Amalgam creep is plastic deformation principally due to
very slow metallurgic phase transformations that involve diffusion-controlled reactions and produce volume increases. The associated expansion makes the
amalgam protrude from the tooth preparation. Such secondary expansion can occur throughout the clinical life
of a restoration. On nonocclusal surfaces, the entire amalgam restoration may appear extruded (Fig. 4-32), and
this can produce unwanted esthetic problems or overhangs in some areas. On occlusal surfaces, abrasion and
attrition tend to limit the overall extrusion. However, occlusal margins become fracture-susceptible ledges elevated above the natural contours of the adjacent enamel
(Fig. 4-33). Extrusion at margins is promoted by electrochemical corrosion, during which mercury from SnHg rereacts with Ag-Sn particles and produces further
expansion during the new reaction. This mechanism,
called mercuroscopic expansion, was originally proposed
by Jorgensen 114 as an explanation for the prevalence of
marginal fracture associated with occlusal amalgams.
The most common evidence of degradation of low-copper amalgams is marginal fracture.

FIG 4 -33 Schematic view of Class I amalgam restoration that
was extruded by mercuroscopic expansion, underwent marginal fracture, and now contains marginal ditch. (Courtesy
Stephen C. Bayne, School of Dentistry, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.)

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

Combinations of brittleness, low tensile strength,
and electrochemical corrosion make occlusal amalgam
susceptible to marginal fracture. Then, at some point,
occlusal stress during opponent tooth contact creates
local fractures that produce a ditch along the margin.
Progression of the events to deeper or more extensive
ditching has been used as visible clinical evidence of
conventional amalgam deterioration (Fig. 4-34) and was
the basis of the Mahler scale
(Fig. 4-35). Mahler
ratings were established from No. 1 to No. 11 by comparing the image of the clinical restoration of interest
to a series of five photographs (scale values of No. 2,
No. 4, No. 6, No. 8, and No. 10) representing increasingly worse marginal breakdown. The rest of the
rating scale deals with the severity of marginal ditching that is below (No. 1), intermediate (No. 3, No. 5,
No. 7, and No. 9), or greater (No. 11) than the main
scale images.
Unfortunately, the impression of extensive (progressive) marginal fracture (to Mahler values of 4 to 11) for
low-copper amalgams has been translated as a reason to
clinically intervene and replace high-copper amalgams.
High-copper amalgams also undergo marginal fracture.
However, despite early ditching, they do not progress to
levels of extensive ditching that would place them at
high risk for secondary caries. Instead, high-copper amalgams display only modest marginal fracture (Mahler values of
3 to 5) over long periods of time. Excellent clinical research

evidence substantiates clinical half-lives for well-placed
high-copper amalgam restorations of 24 to 25 years
( which is addressed later in Clinical Considerations).
High-copper amalgams that are left in place may
eventually fail because of bulk fracture. It is hypothesized that such bulk fracture is the result of mechanical
fatigue. A rule-of-thumb for clinical service is that occlusal restorations are stressed an average of 1 million
times per year. A 25-year service life would correspond

FIG 4-34 Occlusal amalgam restoration with extensive marginal deterioration. (Courtesy Wilder AD, School of Dentistry,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.)

to 25 million cycles of mechanical stress. Typically, materials fail in the 10- to 100-million-cycle range during
laboratory testing. The events contributing to mechanical fatigue affect both the restoration and the tooth
structure. The stresses and strains in both must be considered together, particularly in the case of restorations
bonded to tooth structure.
Mercury Management. Like all other materials in the
world, mercury has the potential to be hazardous if not
managed properly. Therefore it is very important that the
alloying reaction of mercury with the Ag-Sn alloy go to
completion to ensure that mercury does not diffuse into
the oral environment. Once the reaction is complete, only extremely minute levels of mercury can be released, and those are
far below the current health standard. Mercury is ubiquitous

in the environment and is taken into the body in one form
or another via water, air, and food on a daily basis.
The contribution of mercury derived from amalgam
to the overall body burden has been the source of much
controversy but appears to be relatively low. The important perspective is that mercury enters the body everyday no matter what restorative filling materials are present in the mouth. Under normal circumstances, that
mercury is biochemically processed and excreted. As
long as the levels are low, there is no threat for mercury
toxicity. Although poorly understood, mercury hypersensitivity also at times has been claimed as a potential
hazard. This is an immune system response to very low
levels of mercury. However, the number of individuals
identified as potentially hypersensitive is extremely low,
and the sensitivity reaction is very mild and not life
threatening. Mackert
and Mandell" have reviewed
these issues in detail and scientifically refuted the hypothesized problems.
Early claims of mercury problems appeared as soon
as amalgams were first used in the United States. The
original amalgamation process was demonstrated by a
chemist in France. In 1833, two English entrepreneurs,
the Crawcour brothers, realized the practical importance for dentistry, carried the idea to New York, and
promoted the material as an inexpensive and convenient restoration."' However, no attention was given to
the proper mercury-alloy ratios or the type of alloy being used. For the most part, the alloy mixed with the
mercury was prepared by filing silver coins with considerably variable compositions. In many cases, the inconsistency in materials and techniques led to slowsetting amalgams that released mercury from the unset
mass into unprotected dentinal tubules. Although there
are no reported cases of patient deaths, there were several cases of pulp death.
A complex battle ensued (the so-called First Amalgam
War) between dentists using traditional restorative techniques based on gold foil and those using amalgam. The
dispute was based on philosophic choices as to dental

CHAPTER

standards and differences in points of view about the
safety of amalgam. Periodically, there were calls for
eliminating amalgam use because of potentially harmful mercury release. In the 19205 another series of challenges to amalgam use occurred when inferences were
made that mercury was not tightly bound in amalgams .211
The next serious controversy arose in 1980 when Dr. Hal
Huggins publicly condemned amalgam. Dr. Huggins, a
practicing dentist in Colorado, was convinced that mercury released from amalgam was responsible for a plethora of human diseases affecting the cardiovascular and
nervous systems. Patients claimed recoveries from multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, and other afflictions
as a result of removing their amalgam fillings. For almost a decade, a loyal following of patients and dentists
expanded the call to ban amalgam. Research in the
United States and other first world countries has since
demonstrated clearly that there was no basis for any of
these claims.
In 1991, the general American public was widely exposed to the controversy when it was reported by a major television program (60 Minutes). In response to numerous public questions, the profession, the National
Institute of Health-National Institute for Dental Research (NIH-NIDR),"' the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and several other groups held forums involving world-famous scientists and clinicians to reexamine
the issue. Although these experts agreed amalgam research was needed and should continue, they concluded that there was no basis for claims that amalgam was
a significant health hazard."' They strictly recommended
that amalgams not be removed for that reason. However, the controversy is far from being resolved. Claims
of hazards continue to be published in local papers;

FIG. 4-35

4

Dental Materials

nonscientific journals; and occasionally, in scientific journals.08 ,94 ,249 ,250 ,251 However, all published research demonstrates clearly that there is no cause-and-effect relationship between amalgam restorations and other health
problems .40 This controversy will probably never be resolved because there will always be a certain percentage
of patients seeking a miracle cure for their problems.
However, fears of amalgam are not a basis for amalgam
removal. 179
Understanding the issues related to amalgam use has
been a challenging problem for dental patients. The issues are complex, and dealing with them requires some
knowledge of physical chemistry and biochemical processes. It is not realistic to think that a general dentist has
the time to effectively communicate this information. In
addition, most dentists are perceived by patients as having a vested interest in the decision to use amalgam. Yet,
clearly the public wants to know. Fortunately, very clear
and concise reviews of the controversy have been published by reputable consumer affairs groups (Fig. 4-36). 150,
Purchased reprints from Consumer Reports of these reviews provide the best means of patient education.

The health risk from amalgam use is clearly greater
for members of the dental office team than for a patient.
Historically a major, although rare, source of mercury
contamination in dental offices was the accidental spillage of quantities of liquid mercury. Mercury was commonly purchased in bottles containing approximately
1 pound. This was then transferred to dispensers and
eventually to individual capsules for mixing. Mishandling at any stage could result in mercury splashing on
the bench or floor, causing it to be widely scattered as
small droplets. Fortunately the current use of precapsulated amalgam has eliminated most opportunities for a

Mahler scale showing visual levels of marginal deterioration (Rating 1 = none, rating
11 = extensive). The numbers of scale indicate ratings assigned to restoration's appearance
based on comparison of an existing restoration to scale. (Courtesy Mahler DB, School of Dentistry, Oregon Health Sciences Center, Portland, Ore.)

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

*Efficiency is reported in percentage per exposure. No information is
reported for some routes (e.g., skin) because the values are suspected
to be very low and are not yet well established.

are passed up the food chain.

The concentration of naturally derived mercury in food is at times aggravated by the use
of fungicides and pesticides containing methyl mercury. For
most people, organically bound mercury in food is the primary
source of mercury exposure. Humans absorb methyl mer-

FIG 4-36

Mercury thermometer portraying different levels of mercury toxicity. Chronic exposure can be assessed by urinary mercury concentration (as micrograms of mercury per gram of creatinine. (From The Mercury in Your Mouth, 1991, by Consumers
Union of U.S., Inc., Yonkers, NY 10703-1057, a nonprofit organization. Reprinted with permission from the May 1991 issue of
Consumer Reports, for educational purposes only. No commercial use or photocopying permitted. To subscribe, call 1-800-2341645 or visit us at www.ConsumerReports.org.)

major spill, but care must be maintained to avoid hazards
in routine use of amalgam. Careful review of amalgam
handling procedures reveals that the critical times are
when metallic mercury exists in liquid or vapor form,
rather than bound in a set amalgam. As a vapor, metallic
mercury can be inhaled and absorbed through the alveoli in the
lungs at 80% efficiency. This is clearly the major route of en-

try into the human body. Metallic mercury is poorly absorbed through the skin or via the gastrointestinal tract. 263
A summary of absorption routes is presented in Table 4-6.
In addition to metallic mercury, both inorganic and organic mercury compounds are potentially toxic. Mercury
is normally mined as an inorganic sulfide (cinnabar) ore,
which is heated in air to oxidize and drive off the sulfur." The mercury is then collected as a liquid. Mercury
can exist in a wide variety of inorganic compounds, in addition to the sulfide. Many of them are water-soluble and
release mercury ions into solution. Some of these compounds have been used in the past as medicaments. Such
materials are poorly absorbed through the lungs but are
easily absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract.
Mercury also can form organic compounds such as
methyl mercury. Such mercury compounds are readily
absorbed by many organisms and concentrated as they

cury from food readily, but excrete it less effectively than
other forms of mercury. Once absorbed it has a tendency
to concentrate in certain organs such as the liver, kidney,
and brain. It is eventually all excreted, but the rate is depends on the body's ability to convert it to other forms.
It has been suggested that metallic mercury can be
changed into methyl mercury by microorganisms in either the mouth or gastrointestinal tract. However, careful examination of blood mercury concentrations indicates that no biotransformation seems to occur.
In the dental office, the sources of mercury exposure related to

include: (1) amalgam raw materials being stored
for use (usually as precapsulated packages); (2) mixed but
unhardened amalgam during trituration, insertion, and
intraoral hardening; (3) amalgam scrap that has insufficient alloy to completely consume the mercury present;
(4) amalgam undergoing finishing and polishing operations; and (5) amalgam restorations being removed. Each
of these is more carefully considered in the following
paragraphs. Specific recommendations by the ADA
were recently revised and are summarized in Box 4-1.
It is difficult, if not impossible, to totally contain liquid or gaseous mercury because it is very mobile, has a
high diffusion rate, and penetrates through extremely
fine spaces. Even in packages that include plastic blister
wrapping and layers of cardboard, mercury vapor leakage is possible. Therefore mercury-containing products
should not be stored in the open, but rather in closets or
cabinets, to minimize local concentrations in the rest of
the offices. Storage locations should be near a vent that examalgam

hausts air out of the building.
During amalgam trituration, small amounts of material
may escape from capsules. Both reusable capsules and

precapsulated designs have some leakage. Small local
spills or spatters of triturated materials are best dealt
with by collection with a vacuum aspirator (not a vacuum cleaner). During trituration, the high frequency
of agitation can force some mercury-rich material out
of the capsule and create both an aerosol of liquid drop-

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

Dental Mercury Hygiene Recommendations
10. Use high-volume evacuation when finishing or removing amalgam. Evacuation systems should have
traps or filters. Check and clean or replace traps and
filters periodically to remove waste amalgam (includi ng contact amalgam) from the waste stream.
11. Salvage and store all scrap amalgam (i.e., noncontact amalgam remaining after a procedure) in a
tightly closed container, either dry or under radi
graphic fixer solution. Amalgam scrap should not be
stored in water. If the scrap is stored dry, mercury vapor can escape into room air when the container is
opened. If the scrap is stored under radiographic
fixer solution, special disposal of the fixer may be
necessary. Some recyclers only accept scrap amalgam that is dry.
12. When feasible, recycle amalgam scrap and waste
amalgam. Otherwise, dispose of amalgam scrap
and waste amalgam in accordance with applicable
l aws. When choosing a recycling company, it is important to check that the company has obtained all
required government permits and has not been the
subject of a state or federal enforcement action. Because of the nature of environmental laws, the generator of waste (e.g., the dental office) may be held
l egally responsible if it is improperly handled by
others further down the waste stream. Dentists
would be wise to check with their state or local dental society about the laws that apply to recycling
and to request documentation from the recycling
company that the scrap or waste has been handled
properly.
13. Dispose of mercury-contaminated items in sealed
bags according to applicable regulations. Consult
the state or local dental society about the regulations that apply in a given area. Do not dispose of
mercury-contaminated items in regulated (medical)
waste containers or bags, or along with waste that
will be incinerated.
14. Clean up spilled mercury properly using trap bottles, tape or freshly mixed amalgam to pick up
droplets, and commercial cleanup kits. Do not use a
household vacuum cleaner.
15. Remove professional clothing before leaving the
workplace.
Quoted in part from the American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs: J
OSHA, Occupational Safety and Health Administration.

lets and a vapor that may extend 6 to 12 feet away
from the triturator. To minimize this risk, small covers
are mounted on mechanical triturators to contain the
aerosol to the region of the triturator. This does not
eliminate the hazard. These materials persist as air contaminants or as particles that may drop onto the floor
and contaminate carpeting or cracks between tiles. Air
contamination is managed by ensuring that airflow is reasonably high and that fresh air is brought into the office in
a path from the waiting room, through the outer office, and
then into the operatories, before being expelled to the out-

Am Dent Assoc 130:1125-1126,1999.

side of the building without contaminating other building
areas.
Once small droplets of mercury-rich material contaminate the floor coverings, the only practical approach
to decontaminating the area is to replace those coverings. There is no effective treatment for removing liquid mercury from carpeting. Mercury will react with sulfur to
form a stable sulfide (cinnabar), but the reaction is slow
and inefficient. Therefore sprinkling sulfur powder onto
sites of mercury spills will not adequately control the
problem.

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

During insertion of amalgam into tooth preparations,
the mixture is not yet fully reacted and the high vapor
pressure of mercury causes contamination of the air
above the material. While the unhardened material sits
in a Dappen dish for loading into an amalgam carrier,
some vapor is released. This should be cleared by the airflow system for the room. During the intraoral placement and condensation procedures some mercury vapor
is released. To control the vapor, a rubber dam cane used
to isolate the patient and high-volume evacuation should
be used to prevent intraoral vapor from diffusing. After
initial setting, the material has hardened to a solid and
the vapor pressure drops several orders of magnitude.
Scrap amalgam from condensation procedures should
be collected and stored under water, glycerin, or spent
x-ray fixer in a tightly capped jar. The jar should be
nearly filled with liquid to minimize the gas space where
mercury vapor can collect. The unused amalgam will set
but the mercury-rich material in the scrap does not have
sufficient alloy present to become completely reacted.
Spent x-ray fixer has an advantage for controlling mercury because it is a source of both silver and sulfide ions
for reaction to a solid product. Periodically, this material
should be recycled for profit for the office, and to minimize the amount of material being stored. No more than a
small jar of material should be present in the office at any time.

Recycling mercury, silver, and other elements is a professional job. The only known case of human death related to mercury management was due to a misinformed
dental technician trying to distill mercury out of amalgam scrap in the basement of his home.
Once amalgam has solidified, the mercury is tightly
bound. However, one of the reaction products, Ag2Hg 3,
has a very low melting point (127° C). It can be easily
liquefied during finishing or polishing procedures that
generate heat. Then, as a liquid, it has a much higher
mercury vapor pressure. This situation routinely arises
when dentists or dental hygienists polish amalgams without using adequate cooling water and slow polishing.
This process is very deceptive. The Ag-Hg phase is
melted producing a mercury-rich liquid phase that is
easily smeared over the amalgam surface making it look
bright and shiny. The operator can misinterpret this appearance as a highly polished surface.
Melting of the Ag-Hg phase also occurs during amalgam removal. It is common for surface temperatures to
increase several hundred degrees where high-speed
burs contact tooth structure. 'z° This is well above the
temperatures for melting the Ag-Hg phase and vaporizing mercury. Rubber dam, high volume evacuation, and
water cooling can be used to control this situation.
Instruments used for inserting, finishing, polishing,
or removing amalgam restorations do contain some
amalgam material on their surfaces. During instrument
sterilization techniques this material may be heated and
can release mercury liquid or vapor.
Therefore it is

advisable to properly isolate or specially vent the air
from sterilization areas.
Historically, capsules and other contaminated surfaces have not been managed very well in the operatory.
Spent capsules and mercury-contaminated cotton rolls or paper napkins should not be thrown out with regular trash.

They should be stored in a tightly capped plastic container or closed plastic bag for separate disposal. In
most locations, these materials can be placed into a sanitary landfill, but those regulations may change in the
future.
A summary of all of the potential mercury management problems is presented in Fig. 4-37. In addition to
materials storage and materials recycling, there are routine precautions for exposure. By using a rubber dam
and high-volume evacuation, the patient is well protected from even minor, transient exposure to mercury
vapor. These precautions are easy to provide and also
effectively protect the dentist, assistant, and hygienist
from the same vapor. Mercury vapor that may escape
into the room air is not effectively removed by infection
control masks. Masks may catch particulate debris above
1 ~Lm in size and catch droplets or sprays in the air, but
they will not filter mercury vapor from the air. Routine
exposures can be monitored with exposure badges (dosimeters) worn by individuals in the office131 or positioned
within dental operatories near working areas.
In the dental office, the dentist, assistant, hygienist,
and other staff are at more risk of mercury toxicity than
patients because of their long-term contact with mercury vapor. ADA monitoring of mercury levels in dentists has shown that they are in safe ranges despite the
fact that the levels are almost twice the national average
for nondentists. As a group, dentists actually show better-than-average survival rates. The inference is that if
dentists are exposed and survive better than most individuals, then there does not seem to be any basis for the
perceived problem.
Much of the confusion about mercury effects is related to inadequate understanding of mercury processing by the human body. Mercury that is absorbed into
the circulatory system may be deposited in any tissue.
Higher-than-average accumulations occur in the brain,
liver, and kidneys. Mercury ions (Hg') circulate readily
in the blood but pass the membrane barriers of the brain
and placenta only with difficulty. In contrast, nonionized mercury (Hg°) is capable of crossing through lipid
layers at these barriers and, if subsequently oxidized
within these tissues, is removed only slowly. This fact
has become the basis for many claims of neuromuscular
problems in patients with amalgams. However, this mercury is not uniquely from amalgam, the levels are low,
and removing amalgam restorations does not eliminate
exposure to mercury. Mercury does not collect irreversibly in human tissues. There is an average half-life of 55
days for transport through the body to the point of excretion.

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

Sources of mercury hazards in dental operatory include: (1) some mercury vapor rel eased from stored materials; (2) small losses from capsules during trituration; (3) spillage duri ng maipulation for tooth restorations; (4) some vapor exposures to dentist, assistant, and patient during removal, placement, or finishing and/or polishing of amalgam; (5) contamination of
cotton rolls; (6) collection of debris via vacuum suction into plumbing system and sewer system; (7) collection of remnants in jar for recycling; and (8) mercury trapped in small cracks between floor tiles and/or in carpet fibers.
FIG. 4-37

Summary of events occurring during mercury
absorption, transportation, and excretion in the body.
FIG. 4-38

Thus, mercury that came into the body years ago, is no
longer present in the body. The variety of events involved in mercury absorption and elimination are summarized in Fig. 4-38.
Various events mitigate the conversion of mercury
into ions and affect the conversion of the ions to other
compounds. For example, ethyl alcohol is known to interrupt some of the biochemical steps required for bloodbrain transport, thereby facilitating its rapid excretion.

The placental barrier is less effective than the bloodbrain barrier, and some mercury ions are capable of placental transfer, as is about anything else in the circulatory system. Fetal mercury contents, although elevated,
are lower than brain concentrations in the mother.
Effects on fetal development are not fully known. All of
the contemporary evidence from surveys and posthoc
surveys indicates that female dentists, assistants, and
hygienists who are pregnant are at no higher risk of

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

miscarriage or fetal misdevelopment. Even so, it seems
to be judicious to minimize any exposure of these individuals to any potential hazard such as mercury during
pregnancy.
In philosophic terms, the threat that may someday
eliminate amalgam use as a restorative material is not a
question of human toxicity, but rather of environmental
protection. 23 It is now well known that improper disposal
of contaminated waste greatly affects the environment.
There are federal regulations to control large-scale industries that pollute. However, there has not yet been a
wide-ranging focus on small-scale polluters, which could
include local hospitals and dental offices. Although the
relative contributions are small, the local community
problems may mandate that either dental offices control
all mercury effluent or cease using amalgam.
Human beings are constantly exposed to mercury in
their environments from a multitude of sources as a result of both natural emissions and human pollution.
These exposures include the breathed air, consumed
water, ingested food, and medical or dental products.
Typical concentrations of mercury in air vary considerably (pure air contains 0.002 IRg/m 3 ; urban air contains
0.05 VLg/m 3; air near industrial parks contains 3 Rg/m s ;
air in mercury mines contains 300 IRg/m 3 ). The generally
accepted threshold limit value (TLV) for exposure to mercury
vapor for a 40-hour work week is 50 /.Lg/m 3 .2e3
It is key to remember that the body is constantly excreting mercury from these exposures. Therefore the actual body burden at any time is a function of both the dosage
and time of exposure. Under almost all circumstances, the
dosages are low and infrequent, and thus, the body bur-

den poses no health risk. Even if the exposure occasionally is above the TLV, active excretion quickly reduces
the body burden to normally low levels. In this scenario,
any very small contributions from amalgam restorations are very low compared to other naturally occurring exposures, and the material is naturally excreted.
Mercury also occurs naturally in a wide range of
foods but not necessarily in the same chemical form in
all cases. The greatest source of naturally occurring mercury, other than the ore, is as mercury vapor released
during volcanic eruptions. This vapor gradually is deposited in the world's oceans and accounts for the
largest portion of dissolved mercury in water. Material
is absorbed by small organisms such as plankton at the
start of the food chain. It becomes more concentrated in
larger fish higher in the food chain. Swordfish and tuna
have essential no natural enemies and are considered at
the top of the ocean food chain. Within them, the concentration of mercury is typically 1000 ~Lg/kg of mass.
Therefore, eating large amounts of tuna or swordfish
can increase dramatically an individual's body burden.
Since methyl mercury compounds are routinely used as
fungicides and herbicides to coat seeds used to plant
farm fields, these compounds are invariably incorporated into growing vegetables, fruits, and grains. Then,
mercury is concentrated within the land-based animal
food chain. The levels are typically 160 [-Lg/kg in cattle
and 25 Rg/kg in humans.
Only under very rare circumstances have the symptoms of mercury toxicity been observed in human beings (industrial pollution in Minamata Bay; inadvertent
contaminated grain consumption in New Mexico and

FIG 4-39 Landscape of Minamata Bay, Japan (seen in background) in relation to the Chisso Corporation, that was responsible for Hg contamination of the bay during discharges of pollutants . 2°° (Courtesy National Geographic.)

CHAPTER

in Iraq). The Minamata Bay incident in Japan in 1952 is
the most infamous (Fig. 4-39). 2 °° A local chemical plant
(Chisso Corporation) disposed of its methyl mercury
waste into the nearby bay, contaminating the shellfish,
and causing toxic levels of mercury in the fish eaten by the
local population. By the time the source was identified,
52 individuals had died and 202 others were stricken by
mercury poisoning. Since this time, mercury poisoning
of this kind is known as Minamata disease. The symptoms of mercury poisoning identified during this incident were: (1) ataxic gait, (2) convulsions, (3) numbness
in mouth and limbs, (4) constriction in the visual field,
and/or (5) difficulty in speaking. Unfortunately, none of
this symptomatology is particularly unique to mercury
poisoning. Therefore it is very difficult to diagnose the
problem without some special knowledge of an individual's risk to environmental exposure. Similar symptoms
are typical of a wide range of other medical problems.
Therefore it is easy for antiamalgamists to improperly
associate diseases such as multiple sclerosis with the intraoral presence of amalgam restorations.

4

Dental Materials

Amalgam Waste Management. Whereas the use of
mercury in amalgam restorations represents an almost
insignificant risk to patients, the management of the unused or recovered material in dental offices is a much
more complicated situation. The path of mercury from
the purchase of an amalgam product to the end of the
clinical lifetime of a restoration has been monitored (Fig.
4-40). Concerns about mercury management form the
primary basis for the challenge to dentistry to continue
to use amalgam restorations.
As individual political entities (countries, states or
provinces, counties, towns) examine their own pollution
problems, they will adopt restrictions that intend to limit
future contributions of toxic metallic and organic wastes
to the environment. The problem of pollution is less one
of the concentration or amount of individual disposal,
but rather one of accumulation of waste within a relatively closed system.
Small amounts of mercury, silver, lead, or other toxic
heavy metals are accumulated as part of an everincreasing load to the local environment. This is

F I G . 4-40 Cycle of mercury in dentistry in dental amalgam
(From Hoersted-Bindslev P et al:
Dental amalgam-a health hazard? Copenhagen, Denmark, 1991, Munksgaard.)

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

FIG . 4-41 Contributions of mercury from dental offices in Denmark to wastewater in sewage systems compared to the total
wastewater levels.", "' Black bars indicate dental contributions.
Gray bars indicate total levels. (From Hoersted-Bindslev P et
al: Dental amalgam-a health hazard? Copenhagen, Denmark,
1991, Munksgaard.)

exemplified in the case of amalgam. Scrap from
amalgam replacement procedures or from the removal
of failed restorations is typically disposed into the local
sewer system (Fig. 4-41) from a dental office. Amalgam
debris may include large particles (~ 70% > 100 Rm),
medium-sized particles (- 20% = 10 to 100 [,m), and
fine material (~ 10% < 10 ~Lm) particles, liquid mercury,
or mercury dissolved in water).
Some of this material (large particles) can be trapped
with chairside filters in dental offices. Typically the
medium- and small-sized debris escapes into the sewer
system. Because the materials are relatively dense, they
settle out in virtually all regions of the system. Within the
office, amalgam waste collects in corrugations of the flexible tubing connected to the intraoral suction devices, in
plumbing traps, in plumbing lines along the side walls,
and in all piping that connects to the local sewer line.
Materials also collect along the entire path of the community sewer system up to the sewage treatment plant.
Materials arriving at the sewage treatment plant are
extracted and become part of the waste sludge. This material, besides containing heavy metal wastes, also is
rich in nitrogen and phosphate. Because quantities of
waste sludge are large, municipal wastewater treatment
facilities are anxious to dispose of it as quickly as possible. Often the material is claimed by local farmers for
the nitrogen and phosphate as fertilizer. Other times the
material is burned. In either case, the probability that
the solid or vapor will end up on local farming fields
and be reincorporated into the food supply is very high.

It is this "closed system" problem that represents the
real challenge to dentistry. Unless amalgam waste can
be recaptured efficiently, the dental contribution will be
viewed as a significant form of pollution.
In the mid-1980s, Sweden was the first country to
draw specific attention to potential contributions of dental mercury to the environment. As part of their overall
mercury pollution management plan, the Swedish
National Board of Health and Welfare in 1992 recommended the phase-out of amalgam use. For various similar reasons, countries such as Finland, Norway, Denmark, Switzerland, and Germany began to adopt a strict
view on the potential impact of amalgam waste. These
decisions simply fueled the amalgam debates occurring
in the United States and Canada during the early 1990s.
While the European concerns were environmental ones,
the antiamalgamists conveniently reinterpreted these
rulings as evidence of the hazard of amalgam use for
restorations.
The real volume of amalgam waste in sewer systems
is quite low. However, since most other industries have
been heavily regulated in this regard for many years,
their contributions are extremely low. Analyses of industrial levels in Denmark revealed that approximately
90% of all mercury-containing waste arriving at wastewater treatment plants could be traced to contributions
from dental offices . 1 °' Mercury waste in sewage systems is
primarily from commercial or industrial sources, with smaller
amounts from residential sources.
Recent intraoffice recapture systems have helped dramatically lower the actual contributions to the sewage
system from dental practices. However, these have only
been installed on a limited basis. They represent an initial investment to modify the plumbing and vacuum
system of the office, and require continual maintenance.
Although these can be relatively inexpensive, the process of recapture certainly does increase the true cost of
using and managing amalgam restorations.
Early recapture systems appeared in Europe in the
1990s and involved sedimentation or centrifugation of
wastewater in advance of the local sewer connection.
Systems were relatively inefficient and rarely exceeded
75% recovery. Newer systems (using medium particlesize filters" and/or mercury plating approaches), in
combination with chair-side filters, provide much more
efficiency (>92% and >98%, respectively). These can be
installed quickly and without much problem in new
dental practices. However, in older practices there may
be a large number of complicating factors. Existing
plumbing often is highly contaminated and may need to
be removed. Cleaning products are advertised that remove adherent solids from plumbing, but there is no evidence of their effectiveness.
Newer and potentially much more efficient wastewater
treatment systems are being investigated such as bluegreen algae racks in small tanks that would actively con-

CHAPTER

centrate mercury waste. Other bioactive approaches for
individual dental offices are under consideration as well.
Unfortunately for the dental profession, even if a
practitioner ceased to use amalgam as a restorative material, there are still millions of amalgams remaining in
service in the United States alone. Because these restorations will need repair or replacement at some point in
time, the challenge of managing amalgam recapture exists for every dentist. Phasing out of all amalgam restorations currently in service might take 25 to 35 years.
Sewer systems themselves are contaminated from historical disposals of mercury- and silver-containing waste.
Because the materials are heavy and slow to dissolve, it
has been estimated that it might require 25 to 35 years to
effectively flush out the sewer lines. Therefore the problem of amalgam recapture and disposal will remain for
many more years, despite any new rules and philosophies governing amalgam use.
Regulations concerning amalgam waste disposal are
not uniform by region or by permitted levels. Amalgam
waste products are part of the: (1) routine solid trash
from a dental office, (2) air within the operatory, and
(3) wastewater or sewage. The regulations are different
for all situations.
Historically, dental personnel have not managed
well the amalgam capsules and other contaminated
surfaces in the operatory. Spent capsules and mercurycontaminated cotton rolls or paper napkins have been
thrown directly into the regular trash. They may be disposed with that trash but should be isolated to limit the
vaporization of unreacted mercury into the office air. In
most locations that material can be placed into a sanitary landfill, but the restrictions might change in the future. The materials should not be incinerated. Do not
place mercury-contaminated materials in medical waste
bags because these will be burned and mercury will be
vaporized. Do not burn office waste locally because that
also would release mercury into the air.
Air within the dental office contains some mercury
vapor. Adequate fresh air should be mixed into the existing office air to produce a relatively rapid air turnover. Do not mix office air into a large system that could
permit contaminated air to enter other offices in a larger
office building unless it can be established that no risk
exists in this regard.
Regulations for amalgam waste disposal are quite
variable. In general, the hierarchy is that regulations are
stricter as one progresses from the federal, to state, to
county, and finally to city levels. The United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) regulations
govern discharges onto land or into water that are not
part of a sewage reprocessing system. Local EPA regulations are focused primarily on statewide water protection, registration of large or small-scale polluters, assays
of problems, and leverage of fines. County regulations,
if they exist at all, are generally more intolerant and have

4

Dental Materials

stringent pollution levels, but generally rely on state support for assays. Cities are increasingly involved in setting standards, assessing local pollution levels, and levying fines to protect their local wastewater treatment
facilities from unacceptable discharge burdens. At the
same time, cities and counties are under some legal burden to respond to environmentalist groups that may
bring lawsuits against them for perceived pollution of
streams and recreational areas.
Three important problems for regulators of all waste
discharges are: (1) proper technical protocols to detect the
chemical of interest, (2) appropriate assay procedures to
define the average discharge, and (3) meaningful limits
for discharges. In some cases, the equipment is itself a
source of mercury for the samples being tested. Many
protocols have error levels greater than the detection
li mits. In other cases, collected samples do not appropriately represent the operating conditions of the wastewater source. A dental office should not be surveyed at
S AM on Monday. The regulated limits should represent
the risk. Dental mercury wastewater contributions should be
measured in terms of volumes and not in terms of concentrations. Running twice as much water through the system

would halve the effective concentration. The wastewater treatment plant, and ultimately the environmental impact, is a function of the quantity of material and
not the aqueous dilution at the time of discharge.
Actual effluent from dental offices into a wastewater
sewer has been strictly limited in some localities. The
detection limit for mercury in water is ~ 0.02 ILg/L.
Typical regulatory limits enforced by some cities are
0.0002 mg/L = 0.2 wg/L = 0.2 ppb. A new dental office
with fully functional recapture systems will pass this
level. An older dental office with limited recapture activities may not. Rural dental offices may not be connected to wastewater treatment systems at all, using either direct disposal, a septic tank, or a drainage field.
Drainage fields most likely will be prohibited as paths for
dental office disposal because the probability of groundwater contamination is high.
These important environmental considerations, combined with evidence that: (1) current amalgams last 3 to
5 times longer than low-copper amalgams, (2) caries
rates are lower because of fluoridation effects, (3) anterior restorations are now exclusively made from toothcolored materials, and (4) many posterior restorations are
now made from tooth-colored materials, has resulted in
a dramatic reduction overall in amalgam use. Recent ADA
surveys indicate that amalgam use decreased 45% from
1979 to 1990 alone."' If this trend continues, the amount
of amalgam used for new restorations by the year 2010
may be almost insignificant. This pattern, however, does
not eliminate the profession's problem of mercury containment during amalgam removal.
As a response to environmental issues connected to
amalgam and because of the increasing patient demand

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

for more esthetic restorative materials, there has been
great pressure from 1995 to 2000 to provide alternatives
to amalgam. For all practical purposes, use of amalgam
for anterior restorations has disappeared since 1970
because of widespread use of composite, glass ionomers, and all-ceramic restorations. Amalgam's primary
indication is for large intracoronal restorations on molar
teeth or as foundations for crowns. For these situations,
three types of alternatives to amalgam have arisen: metal
alloys (gallium alloys; condensable self-welding metal alloy powders), modified composites (packable composites;
laboratory-processed composite inlays; fiber-reinforced
composite inlays, onlays, or crowns), and all-ceramic
restorations (milled restorations; castable or pressable
ceramics; high-strength ceramics). None of these has
yet displaced amalgam.
Gallium alloys are currently being placed as amalgam
alternatives but are not accepted by the ADA for use in
the United States. These alloys generally have mechanical properties similar to that of amalgam. 73,267,268,275 Clinical trials with these materials, 116,172,186,187 have indicated
problems with mixing
and with early moisture sensiAdditionally,
tivity leading to excessive expansion.
unidentified and potentially toxic corrosion products accumulate on the intraoral surfaces. Although the microstructures of gallium-based restorations are similar
to those for high-copper amalgams, it may be even more
complex. Gallium alloy powder particles that are triturated with 65% Ga-19% In-15% Sn produce a set material with phases of Ag2 Ga, CuPdGa2, (3-Sn, Ag-Sn, and
unreacted alloy.
Clinical Considerations. Clinical longevity is a primary concern for selecting any restorative dental material. Clinical longevity is the median age for a "group" of
related or similar restorations at which 50% of the
restorations have been replaced because of clinical failure. Clinical longevity is determined by monitoring

many restorations for clinical failure over a long period
of time (longitudinal clinical research study) or by collecting information on random failures over a short period of time (cross-sectional clinical study).
Clinical failure is the point at which the restoration is
no longer serviceable or at which time the restoration
poses other severe risks if it is not replaced. Amalgam
restoration-related failures include: (1) bulk fracture of
the restoration, (2) corrosion and excessive marginal
fracture, (3) sensitivity or pain, (4) secondary caries,
and (5) fracture of tooth structure forming the restorative tooth preparation wall(s). The incidence of different failure modes depends on a large number of factors.
Restorations in caries-prone individuals may fail more
often as a result of secondary caries. Restorations in
caries-free individuals generally survive much longer,
to the point that either fatigue results in bulk fracture
of the restoration or the remaining tooth structure fractures from masticatory force.
In many cases, amalgam restorations are not permitted to reach the point of clinical failure. They are replaced before that time in anticipation of failure (clinical
replacement). An example would be the replacement of a
functionally sound restoration because of unacceptable
esthetics. Restorations also have been replaced rather
than being routinely maintained, depending on the government or private insurance coverage policy provisions. Therefore the clinical failure time is often longer
than the clinical replacement time (Fig. 4-42). 111 For any
single restoration, clinical failure or replacement may be
shorter or longer than the average clinical longevity
value describing a group of restorations.
Failure or replacement times may vary from a few
months to as many as 45 to 50 years. This distribution is

FIG 4-42 Timeline to compare clinical failure, actual clinical re-

FIG 4-43 Distribution of clinical failures (survival or failure
rate) for dental restorations. Survival curves can be described
i n terms of the clinical longevity in years for 50% of the restorations, or the surviving population of restorations in percentage at a particular time. (Courtesy Stephen C. Bayne, School
of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.)

placement, and options for clinical replacement. Clinical failure
and clinical replacement refer to individual restoration that
may not reflect average condition for the larger group of simil ar restorations. Clinical longevity refers to the average time for
replacement for a group of similar restorations being studied.

CHAPTER 4

typified by the curve in Fig. 4-43. This average has been
designated the CL, (clinical longevity for 50% of the
restorations) value .28
Many clinical failures of amalgam restorations occur
because of some combination of electrochemical corrosion and mechanical stress. The combination produces
continual marginal breakdown that creates conditions
for more frequent failure due to secondary caries. In anticipation of this failure, amalgams with advanced marginal breakdown are often replaced. The average replacement age of conventional (low-copper) amalgams
in clinical practice is in the range of 5 to 8 years (Table
4-7). There is much less corrosion and marginal fracture
in high-copper amalgams. They more commonly fail
because of bulk fracture, presumably related to fatigue.
In recent years evidence has been mounting that highcopper amalgams, regardless of initial compositional
differences, have a CL50 of 24 to 25 years. High-copper
amalgams not containing zinc do not last quite as long.
Normally, early failure of amalgams is uncommon,
but when it does occur it is related to bulk fracture, improper preparation design factors, or postoperative sensitivity. Conventional amalgams initially have very low
tensile strength because of slow overall setting reactions. Therefore they must be protected from high
stresses during the first few hours after placement.
Spherical high-copper amalgams develop strength more
rapidly and are relatively immune to early fracture from
loading. However, if the final amalgam does not have
adequate depth and/or width at the narrowest portion

*Parentheses indicate that information not stated definitively in reference.
References may be found in References list.

Dental Materials

of its bulk, then it is possible for intraoral loads to produce high resolved stresses causing fracture in the isthmus of the restoration. This is true of all amalgams.
During setting, most amalgams undergo very little
dimensional change. Improperly manipulated and/or
improperly condensed amalgams, however, might undergo increased expansion. This could produce stresses
on tooth structure and create unusual postoperative
sensitivity or pain. However, it should not be confused
with slight sensitivity, related to the fact that an amalgam is a metallic restoration that may conduct heat or
become electrochemically coupled, producing a minor
current that may induce pulpal sensitivity for a few
hours. After that time, corrosion products eliminate the
problem. Until initial corrosion occurs, some oral fluid
penetration may occur along the walls of the tooth
preparation. If the dentin is not adequately sealed, then
fluid flow in the tubules may be induced and sensitivity
could result. This should not occur with adequately
sealed dentin surfaces. The normal resolution of the
problem of persistent sensitivity is replacement of the
restoration.
There are occasional reports of high incidences of
amalgam sensitivity with some spherical alloys, but
there is no careful documentation of any cause and effect. Complaints arise only sporadically and are certainly not universal. No investigation has been able to
identify the causes or solutions to this problem. The
prevalence of this type of sensitivity is presumed to be
very low.

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

External surfaces on amalgams should be relatively
smooth. This discourages the formation of crevice sites
for electrochemical corrosion or for stress concentration
during mechanical loading. The general rule for carving
an amalgam is to produce only surfaces and grooves
that can be made smooth. Detailed secondary tooth
anatomy, which can be carved into amalgam surfaces, is
usually more of a liability to longevity than an esthetic
advantage.
For many years, the smoothness of the restoration
surface as a means of reducing corrosion sites has been
a concern. Until 1985, it was standard procedure to wait
for more than 24 hours and then to polish the amalgam
at a subsequent visit. Polishing has been replaced by
burnishing the surface at the time of placement (see
Chapters 16 to 19). Polishing amalgams occurs only
when the surfaces are not smooth when inspected. Clinical studies have shown no detectable clinical advantage
for polished restorations compared with initially smooth
restorations . 50,129
Amalgam repair is possible to a limited extent. If secondary caries or fracture involves only a portion of an
amalgam restoration, it is possible to leave the unaffected portion and prepare a tooth preparation that includes part of the old restoration as one of its external
walls. Differences in amalgam compositions and corrosion behaviors will contribute to corrosion, but the effect appears to be insignificant.
At sites where support for remaining tooth structure
is compromised, amalgam bonding systems have been
proposed to increase retention and strengthen weak
tooth structure. There are no long-term clinical research
results for the success of bonded amalgam restorations,
but some increases in retention and resistance forms
usually occur. However, when used, the bonded amalgam tooth preparation also should utilize conventional
secondary retention and resistance form features (see
Chapters 17 and 19). Amalgam bonding agents (see
Bonding Systems) also are effective in sealing tooth

preparations, bonding new to old amalgam, and/or repairing marginal defects.
LINERS AND BASES
Many restorative dental materials that provide excellent
properties for the bulk of a dental restoration may not
protect the dental pulp during setting or during cyclic
thermal or mechanical stressing. Pulpal protection requires consideration of (1) chemical protection, (2) electrical protection, (3) thermal protection, (4) pulpal medication,
and (5) mechanical protection (Fig. 4-44). These concerns
become more important as the tooth preparation extends closer to the pulp. Liners and bases are materials
placed between dentin (and sometimes pulp) and the
restoration to provide pulpal protection or pulpal response. Protective needs for a restoration vary depending on the extent and location of the preparation and the
restorative material to be used. The characteristics of the
liner or base selected are largely determined by the purpose it is expected to serve. Because they share similar
objectives, liners and bases are not fully distinguishable
in all cases, but some generalizations can be made.
Terminology and Classification. Liners are relatively
thin layers of material used primarily to provide a barrier to protect the dentin from residual reactants diffusing out of a restoration and/or oral fluids that may penetrate leaky tooth-restoration interfaces. They also
contribute initial electrical insulation; generate some
thermal protection; and, in some formulations, provide
pulpal treatment as well (Fig. 4-45). The need for liners is
greatest with pulpally extended metallic restorations
that are not well bonded to tooth structure and that are
not insulating, such as amalgam and cast gold, or with
other indirect restorations. Direct composite restorations, indirect composite or ceramic restorations, and
resin-modified glass-ionomer restorations routinely are
bonded to tooth structure. The insulating nature of these
tooth-colored materials and the sealing effects of the bonding
agents preclude the need for traditional liners and bases unless

Electrical protection

FIG . 4-44 Schematic view of needs for pulpal protection
below metallic restoration. Varnishes, liners, and/or
bases may be added to tooth preparation under amalgam for purposes of chemical, electrical, thermal, or
mechanical protection, and/or pulpal medication. (From
Bayne SC, Barton RE. In Richardson RE, Barton RE, editors: The dental assistant, ed 6, Philadelphia, 1988, Lea &
Febiger.)

CHAPTER 4

the tooth preparation is extremely close to the pulp and pulpal
medication becomes a concern. This situation is described in

more depth later in discussions of bonding agents (see
Bonding Agents). Thin film liners (1 to 50 µm) can be
subdivided into solution liners (varnishes, 2 to 5 0,m) and
suspension liners (typically 20 to 25 Um). Thicker liners
(200 to 1000 um = 0.2 to 1 mm), selected primarily for
pulpal medication and thermal protection, are sometimes identified as cement liners.
Bases (cement bases, typically 1 to 2 mm) are used to
provide thermal protection for the pulp and to supplement mechanical support for the restoration by distributing local stresses from the restoration across the underlying dentin surface. This mechanical support provides
resistance against disruption of thin dentin over the pulp
during amalgam condensation procedures or cementation procedures of indirect restorations. Metallic restorations may benefit from seating (resting) on sound dentin
peripheral to the lined and/or based regions that result
from excavating infected dentin (see Fig. 4-45). These
seats may help distribute stresses laterally to sound
dentin and away from weaker underlying structures.
Various liners and bases may be combined in a single
preparation, and the dimension between restoration and
pulp may be a combination of natural dentin, liner, and base.

Objectives for Pulpal Protection. To understand the
actions of these agents, it is extremely important to recall the anatomy and physiology of dentin presented in
Chapter 2. Normal coronal dentin includes dentinal tubules that contain cellular extensions (odontoblastic processes) of the cells (odontoblasts) that originally laid
down dentin during dentinogenesis. These columnar
cells remain as a layer along the periphery of the dental
pulp, partially embedded in poorly mineralized dentin
(predentin), and with processes extending outward into
dentinal tubules. The processes are surrounded by

Dental Materials

dentinal fluid when they do not contact the walls of the
tubules. In response to mild, long-term chemical or mechanical insults, the processes slowly recede toward the
pulp while occluding the tubules with peritubular
dentin by depositing hydroxyapatite crystals (see Chapter 2). If the insult is strong and/or near to the pulp, the
odontoblastic processes are retracted more rapidly from
that region and a thin local bridge of hydroxyapatite is
created across the affected tubules. Both of these responses are natural defense mechanisms to insulate the
pulp from chemical, thermal, mechanical, or biologic
challenges.
If the insult produces fluid flow, in or out of the dentinal tubules, the pressure change is sensed by mechanoreceptors within the pulp, and the patient experiences sensitivity. If leakage of chemical irritants from
dental materials or bacteria occurs, then the pulp complex can become inflamed. To protect against these
events, it is paramount to seal the outer ends of the
tubules along the dentinal tooth preparation wall.
Tooth preparation with rotary instruments generates
cutting debris, some of which is compacted unavoidably into a layer on the cut surface. That layer of material is called a smear layer and is typical of any cut surface,
dental or otherwise. Enamel and dentin smear layers are
left in place for unbonded amalgam restorations. The
dentin smear layer (Fig. 4-46) produces some degree of
dentinal tubule sealing, although it is 25% to 30% porous. Flow or microleakage in or out of tubules is proportional to the fourth power of the diameter of the
opening (Fig. 4-47). Halving the diameter of the opening
produces a sixteenfold reduction in flow. Therefore the
smear layer is a very effective barrier. However, because
it is partially porous, it cannot prevent slow long-term
diffusion. Therefore, for amalgam restorations that can
leak along their enamel margins, the smear layer should

DEJ

FIG 4-45 Schematic examples of use of liners and bases for amalgam restorations. A, For shall ow amalgam tooth preparations, varnish or sealer is applied to walls of preparation before insertion of restoration. B, For moderate depth tooth preparations, liners may be placed for thermal
protection and pulpal medication. (Note seats in sound dentin for amalgam restoration.) C, In
very deep preparation, light-cured calcium hydroxide is placed in deepest region in which infected dentin was excavated, and then base of glass ionomer is inserted. Amalgam bonding systems are being advocated as a substitute for liner and varnish, except for calcium hydroxide
l i ner in the deepest region (judged to be within 0.5 mm of pulp).

CHAPTER 4

FIG . 4-46

Dental Materials

Schematic view of dentin smear layer.

F I G 4-47

Schematic view of fluid
flow physics for dentinal tubules.
The flow rate is function of tubule
diameter (d), pulpal pressure difference (delta P) to ambient pressure,
viscosity of dentinal fluid (n), and
tubule length (L). A twofold reduction in opening diameter results in
sixteenfold reduction in fluid flow.

be sealed to produce chemical protection.

Traditional lin-

ers may be used, but dentin and amalgam bonding systems,
discussed later in this chapter, can produce the same or better
effect and are becoming substitutes for liners.

To produce a thin film liner, liner ingredients are dissolved in a volatile nonaqueous solvent. The solution is
applied to tooth structure and dries to generate a thin
fil m. Any liner based on nonaqueous solvents that rely on
evaporation for hardening is designated as a solution liner
(or varnish). Liners based on water have many of the constituents suspended instead of dissolved and are called
suspension liners. Liners are also intended to provide thermal protection and need to be thicker in dimension.
Most varnish coatings are produced by drying solutions of

Copalite
( HJ Bosworth) has been used more widely than most
other varnishes and contains 10% copal resin in a combination of ether, alcohol, and acetone. The resin content
is kept intentionally low to produce a thin film on drying. Thin films work best because they are flexible and
dry rapidly. Thick films tend to trap solvent during
copal or other resin dissolved in a volatile solvent.

rapid superficial drying and become brittle when they
finally dry. Most solvent loss occurs in 8 to 10 seconds
and does not require forced air assistance. A thin film of
2 to 5 um is formed over smear layers along the tooth
preparation wall. Because some moisture is in the smear
layer and varnishes are hydrophobic, the film does not
wet the surfaces well. A single coat effectively covers
only 55% of the surface (Fig. 4-48). A second thin layer
is recommended to produce sealing of 80% to 85% of the
surface. However, because of the use of bonding systems or desensitizing systems (discussed later in this
chapter) with amalgams, the use of varnishes has decreased considerably in the late 1990s.
Suspension liners can produce the same effect, but
dry more slowly and produce thicker films. The typical
film thickness is 20 to 25 um in contrast to the 2 to 5 um
film produced by solution liners (varnishes). Both types
of liner are often extended out over the cavosurface
margins of the preparation. Excess material on external
surfaces is not necessary but is difficult to avoid. It is
easily abraded off. The primary purpose of the liners is

CHAPTER

to provide a protective seal on the exposed dentin surface. The liner layer at the restoration enamel interface
also provides a means of electrically isolating metallic
restorations from external electrical circuits with restorations in adjacent teeth. Otherwise amalgam restorations
may produce small electrical currents during the first few
days that cause patient pain or discomfort. This sensitivity rapidly disappears as electrochemical corrosion
and/or tarnish modify the surfaces of the amalgam.
A key function of enamel and dentin is thermal insulation of the pulp. Most restorative materials are not as
insulating as dentin and therefore thermal insults may
occur during intraoral temperature changes. The need
for insulation is greatest for metallic restorations. Thermal insulation is proportional to the thickness of the insulating material. Approximately 2 mm of dentin, or an
equivalent thickness of material, should exist to protect
the pulp (see Fig. 4-45). This thickness is not always possible, but 1 to 1.5 mm of insulation is accepted as a practical thickness. As the tooth preparation extends closer
to the pulp, a thick liner or a base is used to augment dentin to the proper thickness range. Such a liner or base
cannot harden by evaporation of solvent or water because it would not dry effectively. Material used for this
purpose hardens by a chemical reaction or is light-cured.
In addition to thermal protection, liners are formulated to provide pulpal medication whenever possible.
Two important aspects of pulpal medication are the relief of pulpal inflammation and facilitation of dentinal
bridging for physiologic protection. The materials (eugenol and calcium hydroxide) most commonly used to
provide these two functions are not mutually compatible and cannot be used in the same formulation.
Eugenol is used to alleviate discomfort resulting from
mild-to-moderate pulpal inflammation. Eugenol is a
parasubstituted phenolic compound that is slightly
acidic and produces palliative or obtundent actions on
the pulp when used in very low concentrations. High
concentrations can be chemically irritating. Several
eugenol-containing dental materials are based on the reaction of eugenol with zinc oxide (zinc oxide-eugenol
[ZOE]) to produce liners, bases, or cements. In the liner
compositions, small amounts of eugenol are released
during setting and over several days. For this reason,
these liners were used in the past in those sites where
tooth preparations were moderately deep. Currently,
moderate-depth needs for a liner or base are met with
the use of a resin-modified glass ionomer, as described
later.
In the deepest portions of the preparation or when a
microscopic pulp exposure is suspected, it is more important to encourage dentinal bridging by using calcium
hydroxide compositions. Calcium hydroxide in saturated
solutions (suspensions) is extremely caustic (pH >11),
but when ionized in low concentrations it stimulates the
formation of reparative dentin. Traditionally, calcium

4

Dental Materials

FIG 4-48

Copalite varnish partially occluding dentinal tubules.
A, SEM of one layer of Copalite varnish over smear layer that
seals approximately 55% of the tubules. B, SEM of two layers
of Copalite varnish adjacent to region protected only by smear
l ayer. (SEM micrographs courtesy Stephen C. Bayne, School
of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.)

hydroxide liners are formulated to undergo a chemical
setting reaction, but allow minor amounts of calcium hydroxide to be released from the liner surface to produce
the desired effect. Calcium hydroxide liners generally
are based on the reaction of calcium ions from calcium
hydroxide particles with phenolic moieties on monofunctional or multifunctional molecules. Excess calcium
hydroxide is in the composition, so that some is always
available as a source of calcium and hydroxyl ions. Unfortunately, these liners may degrade severely over long
periods of time, to an extent that they no longer provide
mechanical support for the overlying restoration.
Water is an important component for the chemical setting of both eugenol- and calcium-based liners. The setting reaction of ZOE is accelerated by moisture. Most formulations contain reaction modifiers to produce setting
in a reliable way, but moisture does not interfere with the
reaction. For calcium hydroxide-based liners, the setting reaction involves calcium ions. To start the reaction,

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

*Relative properties are reported in brackets.
LCTE, Linear coefficient of thermal expansion.

some calcium hydroxide must be dissociated by moisture from air or from moist dental surfaces. If the site has
been dried excessively, a moist cotton pledget may have
to be introduced to make the liner set correctly.
Eugenol and calcium hydroxide cannot be incorporated into the same formulation because eugenol rapidly
chelates calcium ions in a strongly exothermic reaction.
Therefore the choice of a eugenol-based versus calcium
hydroxide-based liner is based on the relative depth of
the tooth preparation.
Newer liners place less emphasis on pulpal medication and focus more on chemical protection by
sealing, adhesion, and mechanical protection. Sealing
may prove to be the most important property overall. As long as restorations are primarily ceramic
and/or polymeric materials, they will provide excellent thermal insulation. Newer compositions rely on
mechanically strong acrylic resin matrices, and that
choice makes the release of eugenol or calcium hydroxide ions from the composition much more difficult or impossible.

Historically, restorative material bases have been generated by mixing dental cements at higher-than-normal
powder-to-liquid ratios to increase the final compressive
strength and reduce the concentration of potentially irritating liquids. (The thick mixes of some materials are
sticky and at times lead to problems with adaptation to
the preparation walls and with control of the amount
and contour of base material.)
Zinc phosphate cement and resin-reinforced ZOE cement were widely used for bases before the 1960s. Polycarboxylate cement bases gained popularity starting in
1970. Glass-ionomer cement became more popular from
1985 to 1994. Highly modified forms of glass-ionomer
cement (light-cured resin-modified glass ionomers or
compomers) provide chemical adhesion, good mechanical strength, potential fluoride release, well-controlled
setting, and rapid achievement of strength.
Before the development of modified glass ionomers,
the functions of liners and bases were relatively distinct,
but have since begun to converge. Previously, in a deep
preparation, a calcium hydroxide liner would be placed
first. Then a base would be added to provide mechanical
support and stress distribution. The base would be covered with varnish at the same time the tooth structure
walls were varnished (except that when using zinc phosphate cement the varnish would be applied before the
cement), and the amalgam would be placed. Currently,
light-cured calcium hydroxide and glass-ionomer materials are being used to both line and base relatively deep
preparations (see Fig. 4-45, C.
For indirect restorations, provisions must be made to
prevent dislodgment of the base during impressiontaking or removal of a temporary restoration. Mechanical undercuts or bonding of the base material to prepared dentin is used depending on the type of base material (see Fig. 20-11).
Composition, Structure, and Properties. Representative examples of the composition, structure, and
important properties of solution liners (varnishes), liners, and bases are reported in Tables 4-8, 4-9, and 4-10,
respectively.
Clinical Considerations. Clinical judgments about
the need for specific liners and bases are linked to the
amount of remaining dentin thickness ( RDT), considerations of adhesive materials, and the type of restorative
material being used. A summary of recommendations
for various restorative procedures is presented in Table
4-11. As discussed later in this chapter (see Dental Adhesion: Dentin Sealers), dentin sealers are being used
more frequently instead of dentin bonding systems or
varnishes to seal amalgam tooth preparations. Except in
the deepest portions of preparations for composite restorations, only dentin bonding systems are being used.
In a shallow tooth excavation, which includes 1.5 to
2 mm or more of RDT, there is no need for pulpal pro-

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

*Relative properties are shown in brackets. The values reported are from a variety of published sources from 1988-2000, including manufacturer's
product bulletins. Comparisons should be made only in terms of the overall application requirements and not in terms of any single property.
LCTE, Linear coefficient of thermal expansion; ZOE, zinc oxide-eugenol.
tection other than in terms of chemical protection. For
an amalgam restoration, the preparation is coated with
two thin coats of a varnish, a single coat of dentin sealer,
or a dentin bonding system, and then restored. In most
cases a dentin sealer is the material of choice. For a composite restoration, the preparation is treated with a
bonding system (etched, primed, coated bonding agent)
and then restored. Both the sealer for amalgams and the
bonding system for composites provide chemical protection. To provide any adhesion of amalgams to the
surfaces of the tooth preparation, amalgam bonding systems must be used instead.

In a moderately deep tooth excavation for amalgam
that includes some extension of the preparation toward the pulp so that a region includes less-than-ideal
dentin protection, it may be judicious to apply a liner
only at that site using ZOE or calcium hydroxide.
Either one may provide pulpal medication, but the effects will be different. ZOE cement will release minor
quantities of eugenol to act as an obtundent to the
pulp. It also will provide thermal insulation. However, in a composite tooth preparation, eugenol has the
potential to inhibit polymerization of layers of bonding
agent or composite in contact with it. Therefore calcium

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

Note: Pulpal protection includes pulpal medication, dentin sealing, thermal insulation, electrical insulation, and mechanical protection.
Sealer = Gluma or Hurriseal; base = Vitremer or Durelon cement; cement = Luting cement (e.g., resin-modified glass ionomer).
CC, Composite cement (e.g., Rely X Luting Cement); CH, Dycal liner; DBS, Dentin bonding system; FRP, fiber-reinforced prosthesis; PR, processed
resin; RDT, remaining dentin thickness.

hydroxide is normally used, if a liner is indicated. If
the RDT is very small or if pulp exposure is a potential problem, then calcium hydroxide is used to
stimulate reparative dentin for any restorative material. A thickness of 0.5 to 1 mm of set calcium hydroxide liner is sufficient to treat a near or actual pulp

exposure and provide adequate resistance for amalgam condensation forces. Under these circumstances
(when a minimum thickness of material is protecting
the pulp), for an amalgam restoration, a spherical
amalgam type is recommended for use because less
condensation pressure is required. A sealer is then ap-

CHAPTER

plied before placing a final amalgam restoration. In
the case of a composite procedure, a bonding system
is used.
If extensive dentin is lost because of caries and the
tooth excavation extends close to the pulp, then a cement base should be applied over the already-placed
calcium hydroxide liner. If an adhesive cement base is
chosen (i.e., polycarboxylate cement or resin-modified
glass-ionomer cement) for amalgam or composite restorations, then the adhesive cement base should be applied over the liner and tooth structure to permit chemical adhesion to occur. Sealer or bonding agent is not
applied until after the base is in place.
In indirect restorative procedures requiring multiple
appointments, any necessary base must be placed, with
its own retentive features ensured either by mechanical
preparation features or bonding. This guarantees that it
will not be displaced during impression procedures or
during the removal of temporary restorations.
Survival of liners and bases under restorations has
never been well understood. Even during restoration removal, it is difficult to completely remove the restorative materials and to assess the acceptability of the liners and bases. Solution liners (varnishes) are relatively
brittle and thin and may only provide chemical protection for a matter of days to weeks. However, that should
be sufficient for their purpose. Sealers maintain their integrity much better than varnishes. Bonding agents may
survive years. Liners and bases may be sufficiently intact to limit the extent of tooth repreparation to only the
outline necessary for removal of the old restorative
material. Traditional calcium hydroxide liners are suspected to continue to dissolve and may lose 10% to 30%
of their volume over 10 or more years. Radiolucent
lines often are observed in dental radiographs at the
border of liners. Thus, liners may need to be replaced or
augmented if such changes are obvious when the
restoration is replaced. Long-term changes in both cement liners and cement bases are not well characterized.
It may be judicious under these circumstances to remove most liners and bases during the rerestoration
procedure.

DENTAL ADHESION
Terminology. Adhesion is a process of solid and/or
liquid interaction of one material (adhesive or adherent)
with another (adherend) at a single interface. Most instances of dental adhesion also are called dental bonding.
Adhesive bond strength is evaluated by debonding the
system.
Most situations involving dental adhesion really involve adhesive joints. An adhesive joint is the result of interactions of a layer of intermediate material (adhesive or
adherent) with two surfaces (adherends) producing two
adhesive interfaces (Fig. 4-49). Examples of the classification of different dental uses are presented in Fig. 4-50.

4

Dental Materials

FIG 4-49 Schematic summary of dental adhesion and dental
adhesive joint.

A pit-and-fissure sealant bonded to etched enamel is an
illustration of dental adhesion. An enamel bonding
agent that bonds together etched enamel with composite is a classic dental adhesive joint.
Bond strength is calculated as the initial mechanical
load that generates final fracture divided by the simple,
geometrically defined, cross-sectional area of the bond.
In most cases, the true contact area between the materials involved may be much greater because of a mechanically rough interface. However, the roughness is not
considered in the calculation. The type of bond strength
test is categorized in terms of the initial mechanical loading direction and not the resolved loading direction.
Almost all bond strength tests are categorized as tensile
or shear bond strengths (Fig. 4-51). Samples that have dimensions similar to dental restoration sizes are considered macrotests. In a practical sense, most macrotensile

CHAPTER4

Dental Materials

FIG . 4-50 Examples of classification of dental adhesion (A to C) and dental adhesive joints (D to
F. A, Fissure sealant. B, Varnished wall of amalgam preparation. C, Surface sealer on composite
restoration. D, Orthodontic bracket bonding resin. E, Enamel bonding system for a composite restoration. F, Bonded porcelain veneer.

FIG 4-51 Example of macroshear bond strength testing of bonded dentin samples. A knife-edged
wedge is moved parallel to the bonded surface (dentin) and used to load the composite attached
with a bonding system over a 4-mm diameter bonded area (12.4 mm2) to the point of failure.

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

Bonded
I nterface

FIG . 4-52 Example of production of microtensile bond strength samples for dentin-bonding system testing. A, The crown is removed to create a surface in dentin parallel to the occlusal surface of the tooth. The crown is then replaced with composite bonded to detin. B, The tooth is
sectioned through the width and breadth of the crown to produce longitudinal sections containing composite, bonding system, and dentin. C, The longitudinal section is ground to produce a neck in the region of bonded interface with a small cross-sectional area (e.g., 0.1 mm2).
The elongated test sample is bonded at its broad ends to the test apparatus and pulled in tension to the point of faliure. (Courtesy Bruno Rosa, Londrina-PR, Brazil.)

bond strengths are often only approximately half of the
value of shear bond strengths. Samples that have much
smaller test area dimensions are referred to as microtests. Microtests, such as microtensile bond strength tests
(Fig. 4-52), usually produce strengths two to three times
larger than in macrotests. This occurs because the microsamples have a much lower flaw concentration, and
during bond strength testing, almost all fractures occur
by crack propagation from flaws in the neighborhood of
the adhesive. Any comparison of bond strengths should
be in terms of equivalent testing conditions . 233
Classification. The local interactions that occur at the
interface are classified in terms of the types of atomic
interactions that may be involved. Adhesion is classified
as physical, chemical, and/or mechanical bonding. Physical bonding involves van der Waals or other electrostatic interactions that are relatively weak (Fig. 4-53). It may
be the only type of bonding if surfaces are smooth and
chemically dissimilar. Chemical bonding involves bonds
between atoms formed across the interface from the adhesive to the adherend. Because the materials are often
dissimilar, the extent to which this bonding is possible is
li mited, and the overall contribution to bond strength is
normally quite low. Mechanical bonding is the result of an
interface that involves undercuts and other irregularities that produce interlocking of the materials. The microscopic degree to which this occurs dictates the magnitude of the bonding. Almost every case of dental adhesion
is based primarily on mechanical bonding. Chemical bonding may occur as well, but generally makes a limited
contribution to the overall bond strength.
The common method for producing surface roughness for better mechanical bonding is to grind or etch
the surface. Grinding produces gross mechanical roughness but leaves a smear layer of hydroxyapatite crystals

and denatured collagen that is approximately 1 to 3 um
thick. Acid etching (or conditioning) dissolves this layer
and produces microscopic relief with undercuts on the
surface to create an opportunity for mechanical bonding.41 If the mechanical roughness produces a microscopically interlocked adhesive and adherend with dimensions of less than approximately 10 um, then the
situation is described as micromechanical bonding (micromechanical retention or microretention).
Requirements for Adhesion. To develop good adhe-

sion (good bonding) it is necessary to form a microscopically intimate interface. The adhesive must be able
to approach the molecules of the substrate within a few
nanometers. Forming the interface is described in terms
of the adhesive wetting the adherend.
To produce good bonding, there must be good wetting.

Wetting is a measure of the energy of interaction of the
materials (see Fig. 4-9, B). Materials that interact significantly, producing chemical bonds and reducing their
total energy, are said to wet one another. A liquid that
wets a solid spreads readily onto the solid surface. If a
state of complete wetting occurs, the contact angle approaches zero degrees.
A second requirement for adhesion is that the surfaces being
joined are clean. Quite often this is a difficult situation to

produce and maintain. Clean surfaces are at a high energy state and rapidly absorb contaminants from the air,
such as moisture or dust. If contaminants are not excluded, then the adhesive interface will be weak. A standard process for cleaning any surface is the application
of solvents or acids to dissolve or dislodge contaminants.
Bonding Strengths. Most often the bond strengths of
materials are measured by shearing the adhesive or adhesive joint to produce fracture. Bond strength is measured as a single cycle stress to fracture. However, in the

CHAPTER 4 Dental Materials

FIG 4-53 Schematic summary of contribution of physical, mechanical, and chemical bonding to
i nterfacial adhesion. Physical bonding occurs when negative and positive sites on polymer and
on tooth structure are attracted electrostatically. Mechanical bonding occurs when bonding
agent is mechanically interlocked into microundercuts on tooth surfaces. Chemical bonding occurs as reactive sites on polymer form primary bonds with surfaces of tooth structure.

clinical situation, fatigue may be much more important
than single-cycle loading. Currently, fatigue is too complex to be simulated by laboratory bond strength tests.
The fracture strength measured depends on the path of
the fracture. For an adhesive joint, such as composite
bonded to dentin with a dentin bonding agent, the bulk
materials' strengths control the fracture path. Dentin is
stronger than composite, which is stronger than the dentin bonding agent. If the interfaces are well bonded,
then the fracture occurs within the dentin bonding agent
or is driven into the adherends. If one or both of the interfaces is not well bonded, then the fracture occurs
along the weakest interface.
If the dentin bonding agent is chemically matched to
the composite, it will be wet well by the composite,
chemically intermix with it, and produce true chemical
bonding that will create a very strong interface. Bond
strengths for the interface of bonding systems with dentin
depend on the degree to which wetting occurs. Cut dentin
contains a smear layer, is moist, and is not necessarily micromechanically rough. Selective etching removes some
or all of the smear layer, locally controls the wetness, and

produces a micromechanically rough surface. However,
dentin is still hydrophilic (water loving). Therefore the
dentin bonding agent must be designed to be hydrophilic.
This quality produces a chemically intimate and micromechanically well-bonded interface. Most current dentin
bonding systems have been designed with etching, primi ng, and bonding steps to accomplish this.
As the interfacial bond strength of an adhesive joint
becomes stronger, the bulk strength of the adhesive becomes the limiting factor to adhesive joint strength. One
way of improving the bond strength is to decrease the
adhesive thickness to the point that a fracture cannot
propagate through it in a practical sense. If the adhesive
is thin and/or tortuous in geometry, then any crack is
constantly driven into one or the other adherends. Thus
the joint begins to behave more like the simple adhesion
of the two materials on either side of the adhesive. This
is the status for current dentin bonding agents. By impregnating a finely etched dentin surface, the final thickness of the dentin bonding agent approaches 1 um. Fractures are now diverted into dentin, and bond strengths
of 25 to 40 MPa are common.

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

Summary and Comparison of Macroshear Bond Strengths for Different Materials and Systems
Involved With Dental Adhesion`

* Estimated values are shown in brackets. The combination of adherend, adhesive, and/or overlying adherend is indicated in the left column.

ABS, Amalgam bonding system; DBS, dentin bonding system; EBS, enamel bonding system; SL, smear layer.

An alternative approach to improve bonding is to increase considerably the thickness of the bonding system
(50 to 100 um) by applying numerous coats of the bonding material. This appears to work by behaving like a
stress-relieving liner and increasing the toughness of the
system. Clinical trials with systems based on this approach have been very successful over at least 3 years . 3°
The problem for dentistry is that different clinical situations may require different chemical characteristics for
an adhesive to achieve good wetting. Materials that are
good dentin or enamel bonding systems may not necessarily be good porcelain-bonded-to-metal repair bonding agents or amalgam bonding agents.
A number of dental adhesion or adhesive joint situations are tabulated in Table 4-12 with examples of bond
strengths. These situations are described in the following paragraphs.
Bonding Systems. In dentistry, the agents producing
adhesive dental joints are referred to as bonding systems
and generally have been classified on the basis of the
primary adherend.
Enamel Bonding Systems. Enamel bonding systems
(or dental bonding systems that also produce enamel
bonding) most often consist of an unfilled (or lightly
filled) liquid acrylic monomer mixture placed onto acidetched enamel. The monomer flows into interstices between and within enamel rods.
Enamel bonding depends on resin tags becoming interlocked with the surface irregularities created by etch-

ing. Resin tags that form between enamel rod peripheries are called macrotags (Figs. 4-54 and 4-55). 31 A much
finer network of thousands of smaller tags form across
the end of each rod where individual hydroxyapatite
crystals have been dissolved, leaving crypts outlined by
residual organic material. These fine tags are called microtags. Macrotags and macrotags are the basis for enamel
micromechanical bonding. Microtags are probably more
important because of their large number and great surface area of contact. During the 1970s and 1980s, before
these details were known, bonding studies concentrated
more on the length of macrotags and the patterns of
etching (Type I = core etching, Type II = periphery etchMacrotag length is
ing, Type III = mixed patterns).
unimportant because fracture occurs in the neck of the
tag. Most macrotags are only 2 to 5 um in length. Rod
etching patterns also are generally not important to the
resulting bond strength.
The bonding system copolymerizes with the matrix
phase of the composite, producing strong chemical
bonding. The macroshear bond strength for the joint is
18 to 22 MPa and is affected by both the film thickness
of the bonding system and the shear strength of adjacent enamel rods. The theoretic upper limit for joint
strength is probably approximately 50 MPa. The current
bond strengths of approximately 20 MPa appear to be
acceptable clinically. More than 20 years of clinical monitoring has not revealed any significant degradation of
the mechanical bonds due to fatigue.

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

Adhesive
Enamel
prism (rod)

A

FIG . 4-54 Micromechanical retention of bonding systems to
dental enamel. A, SEM view of etched enamel showing relief
between enamel rods and within their ends. B, SEM view of
enamel bonding agent, from which etched enamel has been
removed, with cup-shaped macrotags and thousands of fine
microtags on each one. (Courtesy Stephen C. Bayne, School of
Dentistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.)

Dentin Bonding Systems. Dentin bonding systems
involve an unfilled (or lightly filled), liquid acrylic monomer mixture placed onto an acid-etched and primed
dentin surface. The bonding primer depends on hydrophilic monomers, such as 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate
(2-HEMA or HEMA), to easily wet hydrophilic dentin
surfaces that contain some moisture. Although primer
and/or bonding agent may flow into dentinal tubules, the
bond strength is primarily achieved by micromechanical
bonding to the intertubular dentin (between tubules)
along the cut dentin surface (see Chapter 5). Despite the
fact that many dentin bonding systems have been formulated to allow chemical reactions to take place with
dentin, this has had little or no apparent contribution on
the final bond strength . Generally, 90% or more of dentin bond strength is presumed to be due to mechanical
bonding. Mechanisms of bonding and the effectiveness
of current systems are presented in detail in Chapter 5.

B
FIG. 4-55 Cross-sectional views of micromechanical retention
of enamel bonding systems. A, Schematic view of macrotags
and microtags. B, SEM cross-sectional view of interface of
enamel bonding agent with enamel revealing microtags between macrotags. (Courtesy Stephen C. Bayne, School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, NC.)

As noted earlier, mechanical preparation of dentin
leaves behind a highly distorted debris layer (smear
layer) that covers the surface and conceals the underlying structures (Fig. 4-56, A). Early dentin bonding systems were hydrophobic and were bonded directly to the
dentin smear layer. Therefore macroshear bond strengths
were found to be less than 6 MPa, because that is the
strength of the bond of the smear layer to sound dentin.
Initial dentin etching processes removed the smear
layer, but tended to overetch dentin (Fig. 4-56, B). Bond
strengths of 10 to 12 MPa were produced, and were not
significantly increased until bonding systems were
chemically modified to become more hydrophilic (18 to
20 MPa). Careful dentin etching produced microme-

CHAPTER 4

chanical relief for bonding between tubules (intertubular dentin) without excessive demineralization of peritubular dentin. Coupled with hydrophilic primers, bond
strengths increased to 22 to 35 MPa. The theoretic limit
for dentin bonding system strength may actually be
higher (80 to 100 MPa) than that for enamel, because
dentin is more resistant to shear fracture. The clinically
i mportant limit for dentin bonding is not yet known.
However, because of the presence of more water in dentin than enamel, the clinical longevity of dentin bonding
may not be as long as that of enamel.
As portrayed in Fig. 4-57, the priming action in dentin
bonding systems is designed to penetrate through any
remnant smear layer and into the intertubular dentin
and to fill the spaces left by dissolved hydroxyapatite
crystals. 247 This allows acrylic monomers to form an interpenetrating network around dentin collagen. Once
polymerized, this layer produces what Nakabayashi
referred to as the hybrid zone (interdiffusion zone or interpenetration zone). Depending on the particular chemistry
of a bonding system, the hybrid layer may vary from 0.1
to 5 um deep. Unfortunately, excessive etching may decalcify dentin from 1 to 10 um deep. If this decalcified
dentin zone is not filled (bonded) by bonding system, it
may act as a weakened layer or zone contributing to
fracture (see Chapter 5). In addition, the extent of the
etching effect on the strength of the collagen fibers is not
yet known. However, these systems demonstrate that
stronger dentin bonding is possible and portend a bright
future for bonding systems.
The key ingredient for priming in many dentin bonding systems is hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA; Fig.
4-58, A). This molecule is an analog to methyl methacrylate, except that the pendant methyl ester is replaced by an ethoxy ester group to make it hydrophilic.
Importantly, it is relatively volatile and has some tendency to produce mild sensitivity 4',1', 88- 20 ' ,2 '1 Dentists
and assistants should be aware that it is very mobile,
can diffuse through rubber gloves, and will cause skin
dryness and cracking in many individuals. Therefore
during the use of primers and bonding agents, high-volume
evacuation should be used to minimize HEMA vapor contact.
Bonding normally has been conducted in three steps
(three-component systems). During the late 1990s, the
number of stages (etching, priming, bonding) was reduced by combining the actions of various steps. Twocomponent systems were devised that either employed
etching with priming/bonding or etching/priming with
bonding. In the latter case, the term self-etching primer
was used to describe the first component of the system.
This is most often achieved by employing acidic monomers that dissolve or disrupt the smear layer, dissolve
hydroxyapatite in the intertubular zone and tubules, and
then polymerize to generate a hybrid zone. Despite the
approach to designing two-component systems, they
generally required significant solvent to cosolubilize the

Dental Materials

FIG 4-56 SEM views of dentin in various stages of etching.
A, Unetched dentin with smear layer. B, Overetched dentin revealing intertubular spaces and enlarged dentin tubule openi ngs. (A, Courtesy Stephen C. Bayne, School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, B, Courtesy
Bruggers K, School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC.)

modifying material. Solvent levels among systems vary
considerably but are generally in the range of 65% to 90%
solvent .s2 Choices for solvent systems, based on acetone
or ethanol with water, do affect the wetting efficiency
(see Chapter 5).
For bonding systems to efficiently produce a hybrid
layer, it is extremely important to keep the dentin hydrated. Quite often, the rinsing and drying of dentin
that follows tooth preparation or specific etching steps,
results in dehydrated superficial layers of dentin. Etched
dentin no longer contains hydroxyapatite crystals between collagen fibers. It consists only of the remaining
collagen and water. Dehydration, whether intentional or
not, causes the remaining collagen sponge to collapse
with collagen molecules forming a mat and excluding
monomers necessary for hybrid layer formation. Therefore etched dentin either must be kept moist or be intentionally rehydrated. Rehydration can be accomplished
with a moist cotton pledget or applicator tip in contact

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

FIG .4-57 Cross-sectional views of micromechanical retention of dentin bonding system.
A, Schematic view of composite, hybrid layer with microtags, and tubules with resin microtags
after dentin dissolution. B, Schematic view of resin-impregnation phase, which is responsible
for most adhesion, showing the microtags within intertubular dentin as resin wrapped around
collagen fibers. (Courtesy Bart Van Meerbeek, Department of Operative Dentistry and Dental Materials, Catholic University of Leuven, Kapucijnenvoer 7, B-30000 Leuven, Belgium.)

CHAPTER4

Dental Materials

FIG . 4-58 Examples of acrylic monomers used in bonding systems because of their hydrophilicity. A, HEMA. B, 4-META.

with the surfaces for approximately 10 seconds or by the
use of rewetting agents. If dentin moisture is inadequate,
then the hybrid layer will not form, and the bonding
system will fail to seal and bond. It is suspected that inadequate precautions in this regard in many bonding
instructions during the early 1990s may have contributed to the premature failure of many dentin bonding
systems.
The latest dentin bonding systems combine all three
stages of dentin bonding into a single component (onecomponent system). This approach provides a much simpler procedure for bonding to enamel and dentin, but is
not necessarily well designed to wet and bond onto other
substrates such as ceramic, composite, or amalgam. Therefore, three-component systems, which allow procedural
modifications to accommodate for differences in substrate properties ( multipurpose bonding systems), may continue to be used. It is extremely challenging to create a
truly universal one-component bonding system that performs well in all possible bonding situations.
Amalgam Bonding Systems. Amalgam bonding
systems may be used to seal underlying tooth structure
and bond amalgam to enamel and dentin. They require
dual characteristics to achieve optimal wetting. Amalgam is strongly hydrophobic, whereas enamel and
dentin are hydrophilic. Therefore the bonding system
must be modified with a wetting agent (comonomer)
that has the capacity to wet both hydrophobic or hydrophilic surfaces. Typical dentin bonding systems may
be used, but special 4-methyloxy ethyl trimellitic anhydride

(4-META)-based systems are used frequently. This monomer molecule contains both hydrophobic and hydrophilic ends (Fig. 4-58, B).
Macroshear bond strengths for joining amalgam to
dentin are relatively low (2 to 6 MPa). Although good
bonding occurs to tooth structure, micromechanical
bonding at the interface of the amalgam with the bonding system is poor. Most debonding occurs by fracture
along this interface. Since no chemical bonding occurs
at this interface, it is important to develop micromechanical bonding. To accomplish this, the bonding system is applied in much thicker layers (10 to 50 um), so
that amalgam being condensed against the resin adhesive layer will force fluid components of the amalgam to
squeeze into the unset bonding adhesive layer and produce micromechanical laminations of the two materials
(Fig. 4-59). Thicker bonding agent films can be produced by adding thickening agents to the unset bonding materials or by applying many (five to eight) applications of bonding material.
The primary advantages for amalgam bonding agents in
most clinical situations are the dentin sealing and improved
resistance form, but the increase in retention form is not significant. Adhesion of amalgam to tooth structure is not
necessary in clinical circumstances when satisfactory retention and resistance forms of tooth preparation already exist. Primary indication for amalgam bonding is
when weakened tooth structure remains and bonding
may improve the overall resistance form of the restored
tooth.

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

FIG 4-59 A, Schematic view of the adhesive joint created with amalgam bonding system. Micromechanical bonding holds bonding agent to the surface of etched and primed tooth structure. Thick unset bonding agent becomes interdigitated along the interface with residual amalgam alloy particles and amalgam matrix to create micromechanical interlocking. B,
Cross-section of set amalgam (right) i ntermixed with set bonding agent (left) to create micromechanical bonding. (A, Courtesy Stephen C. Bayne, School of Dentistry, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC. B, Courtesy Jorge Perdigao, Division of Operative Dentistry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minn.)

If sealing amalgam preparations is the sole purpose

Porcelain and Ceramic Repair Systems. Fractured

for bonding, then an alternative is the use of dentin sealers.

regions on porcelain-fused-to-metal or all-ceramic restor-

The earliest version of such a system (Gluma 2, Bayer

ations may be repaired by etching the surface with hy-

Dental Products) was actually the primer component of

drofluoric (HF) acid, silanating the etched ceramic ma-

a dentin bonding system. Since the introduction of that

terial, applying bonding agent, and adding composite to

product, several others have been developed that are es-

replace the missing material. This is not a long-term solu-

sentially primer monomers and/or polymers dissolved

tion to the problem but does provide an immediate alter-

in solvent that penetrate the surfaces of the preparation

native rather than complete replacement of the original

and dry or are cured as a polymer film. The action of

restoration. Wetting of ceramic materials by bonding

this film is very similar to that of varnish, except the film

materials is different than for dentin and may not work

has much better wetting characteristics and produces a

well with all bonding systems. If the substrate being re-

completely impervious layer. The film actually covers

paired includes exposed metal alloy on a portion of a

enamel as well as dentin but is still categorized as a

porcelain-fused-to-metal restoration, then the

dentin sealer. Because the same material may be used

should be sandblasted and etched to enhance retention.

over open dentin tubules on exposed root surfaces to

Cast Restoration Bonding/Luting Systems.

metal

Cast

eliminate fluid flow and desensitize dentin, dentin seal-

restorations are retained in teeth by appropriate prepa-

ers are also known as dentin desensitizers. However, an

ration design and by dental cements, whose structure

expansive list of other products also may be called den-

and properties are detailed later in this chapter. The ad-

tin desensitizers, but they are not routinely used to seal

hesion process involves cement adaptation to surface ir-

dentin under amalgam restorations.

regularities (dental luting cement) in a way that helps pre-

Bonding systems used below insulating restorations,

vent the restorations withdrawal along the original

such as composite, do not utilize traditional liners and

path of insertion. Cements may be chemically adhesive

bases except when the tooth excavation is extremely

(polycarboxylate or glass ionomer), but most of the bond

close to the pulp (RDT <0.5 mm). In that case, a tradi-

strength results from mechanical adhesion. The limits to

tional calcium hydroxide liner is used for pulpal med-

bond strength in these situations relate to: (1) the rela-

ication, to stimulate reparative dentin (see Fig. 4-45).

tively poor wetting characteristics of viscous luting ce-

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

ments and (2) the relative thickness of luting cement.
Both of these features contribute to low bond strength.
If the cement does not wet the substrate well, then fractures propagate easily along the interface, typically with
dentin. If the cement is more hydrophilic and wets dentin well, then fractures propagate within the weakest
solid in the joint, which is the dental cement. The adhesive joint bond strength is improved by using the strongest cements (composite or resin cements), roughening and etching
both the casting surfaces and dentin surfaces, using composite materials that contain wetting agents, and attempting to
reduce the cement thickness in the adhesive joint. All of these

features are in the section on cements used for Maryland bridges (see Chapter 15).
These same principles also apply to all other situations
involving adhesion in dentistry, such as sealants, bonded
orthodontic brackets, denture adhesives, porcelain-tometal bonding, and osseointegration of implants. In
some cases, adhesion involves several interfaces and is
complex.
PIT-AND-FISSURE SEALANTS
Terminology. Pit-and-fissure sealants were first proposed for dentistry in the late 1960s. They prevent tooth
preparation and restoration techniques for the elimination of caries-prone pits-and-fissures on occlusal surfaces of teeth. Pits-and-fissures that are not self-cleansing
are considered caries-prone (see Figs. 3-17, 9-5, B, and
13-3, A). Normally, they accumulate organic debris and
oral bacteria, providing an ideal site for the development of caries. The objectives of pit-and-fissure sealants
are simply to eliminate the geometry that harbors bacteria and to prevent nutrients reaching bacteria in the base
of the pit or fissure. Sealants are used to occlude portions of these sites that are not self-cleansing. Any material placed to seal these sites tends to overfill the area.
Because sealant has only modest wear resistance, contact area wear and food abrasion may quickly wear it
away from naturally self-cleansing areas where it is not
needed. However, key areas remain occluded, resulting
in continued benefits.
The principal feature of a sealant required for success is adequate retention. Most pits and fissures have
some degree of macroretention but debris may be in
the fault, access may be inadequate, or fluidity of the
sealant may be insufficient to allow its penetration to
the deepest recesses of these sites. Therefore micromechanical retention is required. Sealant is applied only
after gross debridement, isolation, and acid etching of
the surfaces. Sealant cannot be applied so precisely
that there is no excess extending onto self-cleansing areas of occlusal surfaces. Therefore it is important that
the material be adjusted as needed following placement (see Chapter 13 for the technique) so that it does
not interfere with normal occlusal contacts or disrupt
occlusal paths. Once it has been removed from self-

A

B
FIG 4-60 Fissure sealants. A, Schematic view of idealized fissure after sealing and after loss of excess sealant. B, SEM crosssection of sealed fissure. Sealant does not penetrate into entire
fissure. Excess sealant on occlusal surface has been mostly
worn away to boundary of self-cleansing zone. (A, From Bayne
SC, Barton RE. In Richardson RE, Barton RE, editors: The dental
assistant, ed 6, Philadelphia, 1988, Lea & Febiger, B, Courtesy
Mitchell S, School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC.)

cleansing areas, the remaining sealant blocks bacterial
accumulation occurring in otherwise non-self-cleansing
locations (Fig. 4-60).
Classification. The division of sealants into classification categories is trivial. Sealants are categorized in terms
of polymerization method, as self-curing or visible-light-

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

curing. Early sealants were based on methyl methacrylate or cyanoacrylate cements. Most contemporary compositions are unfilled (or only lightly filled) and based
on difunctional monomers such as those used for the
matrix of composites. The principal monomer in these
systems (e.g., BIS-GM; see the section in this chapter on
Historical Development) has largely been replaced by
BIS-GMA analogues for political reasons during the late
1990s. This issue is discussed shortly. The principal monomer may be diluted with lower molecular weight species (e.g., triethylene glycol dimethacrylate [TEGDMA,
also abbreviated TEGDM]) to reduce the viscosity. Small
amounts of colorant, such as TiO2, may be added to
make the appearance slightly different from occlusal
enamel. Otherwise the sealant is clear and often difficult
to locate during clinical inspection on recall. Self-curing
compositions have the advantage of curing quickly
enough that they are retained in sites whose orientation
may encourage flow away from the area. Self-curing materials have to be applied when they are fluid enough to
penetrate the pit or fissure and so that they begin to cure
before running away from the site. This combination of
characteristics sometimes causes problems in obtaining
adequate penetration. If occlusal surfaces are appropriately oriented during the procedure to control flow, then
light-curing materials are actually simpler to use. They
can be applied and allowed to flow for a convenient
time before exposure to a visible light source for curing.
Composition, Structure, and Properties. Because
the primary clinical property is flow into small access
spaces, a penetration coefficient is normally calculated for
comparison of products. It describes the relative rate of
flow in a standard sized orifice. Penetration is a function
of both capillary action and viscosity. If the site is well
cleaned, etched, rinsed, and dried, then acrylic monomers such as BIS-GMA tend to wet the surface reasonably well. Even if the opening in the pit or fissure is
small, if there is good wetting, then capillary action will

Penetration Coefficients for Typical
Pit-and-Fissure Sealants and
Surface Sealers

Adapted from Retief DH, Mallory WP: Pediatr Dent 3:12-16, 1981;
O'Brien Wj, Fan PL, Apostolides A: Oper Dent 3:51-56,1978; and Fan
PL, O'Brien Wj, Craig RG: Oper Dent 4:100-103,1979.

tend to draw the material into the orifice. The viscosity
must be low enough, for a long enough time, for the
material to penetrate into the defect site. Penetration coefficients for first generation sealants are reported in Table 4-13.
Complete penetration of sealant is not absolutely critical. It
is possible to occlude only the neck region of a fissure
and produce clinically acceptable results. An example of
a fissure is shown in Fig. 4-60, A. An example of a typical cross-sectional view is shown in Fig. 4-60, B. Quite
often, the local geometry creates a defect with a wide
orifice.
Glass-ionomer sealants were explored for pit-andfissure applications. However, they lacked sufficient
abrasion resistance and were easily lost. In addition, they
were brittle and prone to fracture, exposing the underlying portions of unfilled pits or fissures to the intraoral
environment.
Traditional composites, by themselves, are not good
sealants because they do not penetrate into pits and
fissures readily because of their comparatively high viscosity. However, they may be involved in treating pitand-fissure caries, especially when used with a bonding
adhesive, because the bonding system adhesive is very
similar to a sealant material. If a fissure is minimally carious, then excavation of the caries and restoration with a very
small composite provides conservative management of the defective enamel region (see Chapter 13).
Newer low-viscosity versions of composites, flowable
composites (see Composites later in this chapter), have
been advocated for a wide range of applications including pit-and-fissure sealants. They have good wetting,
sufficient flow, adequate abrasion resistance, and good
fracture resistance. In fact, one of the earliest flowable
composites was a pit-and-fissure sealant, to which a
modest amount of filler had been added.
The properties of sealants are essentially those of the
resin matrix component of composite materials. There is
no evidence that water absorption, chemical degradation, or other events observed with composites, detract
from the longevity of these materials. However, there
has been a controversy concerning the BIS-GMA monomers in sealants. In 1994, a single report suggested that
BIS-GMA (produced from bisphenol-A and glycidyl
methacrylate reaction) could be decomposed into its
constituents releasing bisphenol-A (BPA). BPA is known
to be an estrogenic material. 181,199,217 Further investigation revealed a number of scientific problems with this
report, such as the misidentification of TEGDMA as
BPA. However, to avoid political controversy over the
safety of these materials, manufacturers quickly switched
to alternative monomers that did not include BPA as a
precursor. Another problem with the original report
was that measured levels of monomer released from
sealants seemed unusually high. Unfortunately, it was
not noted during the sampling procedure that the air-

CHAPTER

inhibited superficial layer (see Composites later in this
chapter) of resin had not been removed by wiping with
a cotton roll before sampling the sealants. This small
layer is generally wiped away or quickly lost during the
first few chewing strokes. This material is not representative of the actual cured sealant material below. Even
so, sealants are not totally innoccuous. Some of the diluent monomer (TEDGMA) remains unreacted (residual
monomer) and is slowly diffused out of the sealant.
However, both the small amount and the very long time
period of release (see Biocompatibility earlier in this
chapter) suggest that only minimal health risk would
ever be involved.
Clinical Considerations. During the early 1970s a
large number of clinical studies were initiated to determine both the relative reduction in caries possible with
sealant use as well as the clinical longevity of sealants.
Simonsen has reported excellent clinical success after
15 years with teeth sealed only with a single application
of sealant. Prevention of occlusal caries at defects depends simply on the exclusion of bacteria or their nutrients (Fig. 4-61). Numerous clinical investigations have
demonstrated that as long as pits-and-fissures remain
completely sealed, there is 100% prevention of caries at
those sites
As long as the sealant is retained, it will
achieve this end. Sealant types differ in both short- and
long-term retention.
Absolutely no evidence indicates that sealant ever
completely wears away. If the sealant is lost or leaks,
then the site is once again at risk to caries. It may be lost
because of failure of the acid-etching or the micromechanical retention to the acid-etched surface. It is common for saliva or moist air contamination to interfere
with the effects of acid-etching. However, loss of sealant
from areas that are not self-cleansing is minimal.
The ideal time to apply sealants is soon after occlusal
surfaces erupt into the oral environment. However, at
that time, very little of the tooth has erupted and it is
difficult or impossible to use a rubber dam for moisture
control. Therefore cotton rolls and/or absorbent wedges
may be used instead. Without special care, it is common
for some contamination of the acid-etched enamel to occur. This contamination prevents resin penetration into
micromechanical spaces and leads to premature failure.
During recalls, if the sealant has been lost, then it can be
reapplied. With careful management and repair of
sealed surfaces it is possible to achieve 100% reduction
in occlusal caries in those areas.
Sealants also have been applied to smooth-surface
tooth structure to try to eliminate caries. For smooth
surfaces, however, fluoridated water is very effective in
reducing caries prevalence. Sealants that have been applied to smooth surfaces are abraded by food and/or
toothbrushes and may be lost at relatively rapid rates.
Because toothbrush bristles are large, they do not affect
sealants in pits-and-fissures.

4

Dental Materials

Fluoride-containing sealants have been investigated.
The contribution of fluoride in these circumstances may
be very small at best. Clinical studies in which sealants
were used to seal fissures that were minimally carious,
produced complete inhibition of the caries process.
Therefore fluoride modification of the enamel would
not seem to be very beneficial. Although not proven,
there is strong suspicion that any retained sealants do
not leak along their margins. Those that are poorly
bonded are lost almost immediately. In those circumstances, the limited time for diffusion of fluoride from
the sealant to the underlying tooth structure would
probably not provide sufficient fluoride to completely
discourage caries.
Another important consideration for sealant use is the
degree to which children and adolescents are susceptible to caries. Strong evidence supports that there are
two categories of young patients, one with a much
greater caries predisposition (see Chapter 1 and 3). This
latter category of patients would benefit the most from
the use of pit-and-fissure sealants. One sure indication
of apparent caries susceptibility is a dental history of
caries on the occlusal surfaces of primary teeth.
If
17,69,218

.

152

A

B
FIG . 4-61 Example of function of sealant on first molar after
( A) 5 years and (B) 15 years of clinical service. Some abrasion
of sealant has occurred in occlusal areas that appear selfcleansing. (From Simonsen RJ: J Am Dent Assoc 122(11):34-42,
1992.)

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

FIG 4-62 Key components of composites. Schematic view of
generalized composite showing continuous phase, dispersed
phase, internal interfaces, and external interface.

all individuals were routinely being examined by a dentist, then their record would provide simple evidence
for the choice of whether to apply sealants to the permanent teeth. Older patients with reduced saliva flow
are at increased risk to caries and also should be considered candidates for sealants.
Sealants also are used to repair or seal leaking or failing dental restorations
Sealants have demonstrated
great usefulness in sealing poor margins of amalgam restorations for up to 15 years . 153 In some cases, sealants
also have been used to successfully seal surfaces of incipient carious lesions adjacent to existing restorations.
Despite the enormous long-term benefit for patients
with sealed pits-and-fissures, this prevention method
was used routinely by only approximately 16% of dental
practices in the United States in 1992. This low level of
usage reflects several influences. When the first sealants
were placed several decades ago, a high level of technical difficulty led to early failure. For many years, some
dentists have expressed limited enthusiasm for prevention. Frustration was associated with delayed commitment by insurance carriers to reimburse dental practices for these procedures. It is now accepted that sealants
.

provide outstanding service, when done properly, for very low
costs. In societies committed to dental care, this is a core strategyfor early management of caries.

An interesting adjunct preventive technique has been
the use of fluoride varnishes.
Fluoride varnishes
first appeared in clinical practice in the late 1960s in
Europe, about the same time as pit-and-fissure sealants,
but were not adopted for use in the United States until
the late 1990s. Due to the fluoride-releasing levels of
these materials, they are treated as medical devices and
strictly regulated by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA). Clinical trials
effectiveness have been exclusively conducted in children to date, demonstrating ex192

on

cellent effectiveness. The only clinical disadvantage is
the temporary discoloration of the teeth.
Fluoride-containing varnishes (e.g., Duraphat [Colgate], Durafluor [Pharmascience], Fluor Protector
[Ivoclar-Vivadent]) are intended only as temporary
fil ms on teeth that extend the contact of fluoride with
existing tooth structure . 35 They remain on tooth structure for many hours, affording more opportunity to produce fluoride-modified hydroxyapatite that is more
acid resistant (i.e., more caries resistant) and accelerating the remineralization of early carious lesions. These
are generally considered as effective as or more effective
than topical fluoride treatments. These varnishes contain a film-forming agent (e.g., as ethyl cellulose or collodion), releasable fluoride, solvents, and wetting agents.
They are applied to teeth with a brush, cotton-tip applicator, or syringe-type applicator in just a couple of minutes during which time they dry to coat tooth surfaces.
To maintain the fluoride effect, these should be reapplied approximately every 6 months. The main cariostatic
effect

offluoride varnishes is the remineralization of early car-

ious lesions.

COMPOSITES
Terminology. A composite is a physical mixture of materials. The parts of the mixture generally are chosen
with the purpose of averaging the properties of the
parts to achieve intermediate properties. Quite often a
single material does not have the appropriate properties
for a specific dental application.
A schematic view of a generalized composite is presented in Fig. 4-62. Composites typically involve a dispersed phase of filler particles distributed within a continuous phase (matrix phase). In most cases, the matrix phase
is fluid at some point during the manufacture or fabrication of a composite system.
A dental composite has traditionally indicated a mixture of silicate glass particles within an acrylic monomer
that is polymerized during the application. The silicate
particles provide mechanical reinforcement of the mixture (reinforcing fillers) and produce light transmission
and light scattering that adds enamel-like translucency
to the material. The acrylic monomers make the initial
mixture fluid and moldable for placement into a tooth
preparation. The matrix flows to adapt to tooth preparation walls and penetrate into micromechanical spaces
on etched enamel or dentin surfaces.
Because the flow of uncured composite is quite limited, most composite manufacturers provide a bonding
system. Bonding systems are primarily unfilled acrylic
monomer mixtures, similar to the matrix of the composite, that are preplaced onto etched tooth surfaces to form
a 1- to 5-um film. It micromechanically interlocks with the
etched surfaces, seals the walls of the preparation, and
copolymerizes with the composite restorative material
that fills the tooth preparation. Dentin and/or enamel

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

FIG 4-63 Chemical formulas of difunctional monomers commonly used in composites. A, BISGMA monomer. B, UDM monomer. C, TEGDMA monomer.

bonding systems, or universal bonding systems, may be
provided as part of the composite product package.
Although "dental composite" or "composite" is the
technically correct term for these materials, various terms
have been widely accepted as well. Composites often
have been called composite restorative materials, filled
resins, composite resins, resin composites, resin-based com-

or filled composites.
These alternative terms become more confusing as the
field of dental polymers becomes more sophisticated and
simultaneously more complex. In this textbook, the term
composite is used. Most dental materials are composites of
some type. If these compositions are modified to include
special polymer phases, then they may be called resincontaining composites. For example, glass-ionomer cements have been modified with both polymer-containing
fillers and monomer-containing matrices. They are classified as hybrid or resin-modified glass ionomers but could
equally well be described as modified composites.
Historical Development. Early attempts at esthetic
filling materials that predated acrylic resins and composites were based on silicate cements. These cements
resulted from reactions of phosphoric acid with acidsoluble glass particles to form a silica gel matrix containing residual glass particles. Solubility problems with
these materials led to the introduction of unfilled acrylic
systems based on polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA).
posites,

Methyl methacrylate (MMA) monomer contracted excessively during polymerization, permitting subsequent
marginal leakage. Also, PMMA was not strong enough
to support occlusal loads. Therefore reinforcing ceramic
fillers, principally containing silica, were added to the
composition. Retrospectively, the original PMMA materials now are called unfilled acrylics. (If the amount of
filler or fillerlike phase added to a resin matrix is small,
the overall composition is considered unfilled. Therefore 1% to 2% filler-modified sealant compositions are
still classified as unfilled.)
MMA-based matrices were supplanted by BIS-GMA
(alternatively Bis-GMA). BIS-GMA is a difunctional
monomer originally produced as the reaction product
of bisphenol-A and glycidyl methacrylate (Fig. 4-63,
A). Several analogues of that structure have been investigated (modified BIS-GMA). Another very similar
difunctional molecule used in composites is urethane dimethacrylate (UDMA). UDMA replaces the bisphenol-A
backbone with a linear isocyanate one (see Fig. 4-63, B).
Both BIS-GMA and UDMA are extremely viscous. For
practical reasons, they are diluted with another difunctional monomer with an aliphatic backbone, TEGDMA,
of much lower viscosity (see Fig. 4-63, C).
To gain the full advantage of a composite formulation, it is very important to provide interfacial bonding between the phases. In modern composites, silica

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

particles are precoated with monomolecular films of
silane coupling agents. These molecules are difunctional.
One end is capable of bonding to hydroxyl groups,
which exist along the surface of the silica particles, and
the other end is capable of copolymerizing with double
bonds of monomers in the matrix phase. Coupling agents
work best with silica particles. Therefore all composites
have been based on silica-containing fillers.
Filler compositions often are modified with other ions
to produce desirable changes in properties. Lithium (Li)
and aluminum (Al) ions make the glass easier to crush to
generate small particles. Barium (Ba), zinc (Zn), boron
(B), zirconium (Zr), and yttrium (Y) ions have been used
to produce radiopacity in the filler particles. Excessive
modification (by replacement of the silicon in the structure) however, can reduce the efficacy of silane coupling
agents.
Pure silica occurs in several crystalline forms (such as
crystobalite, tridymite, or quartz) and in a noncrystalline form (glass). Crystalline forms are stronger and
harder, but when used, result in composites that are difficult to finish and polish (Fig. 4-64). Therefore most
composites are now produced using silicate glass. Barium, zinc, and yttrium-modified silicate glasses are currently the most popular fillers.
The fluidity of a mixture of filler and matrix monomer
is affected by the fluidity of the monomer and the
amount of filler incorporated. The friction between the

filler particle surfaces and the monomer is a principal
factor controlling the fluidity. As the filler surface area
increases, the fluidity decreases. Large filler particles
have a relatively small amount of particle surface area
per unit of filler particle volume. As an equivalent volume of smaller filler particles is used to replace larger
ones, the surface area increases rapidly. For example,
when filler particles with diameters that are one tenth as
large are substituted, the surface area increases by a factor of 10. The situation is further exacerbated for microfiller particles made from SiO 2, which tend to agglomerate into chains.
Placement of composites cannot be accomplished so
precisely that adjustments to anatomic contours will not
be needed after curing. Typically, the restoration is produced by intentionally overfilling the tooth preparation
a small amount. The anatomic contours are accomplished by gross cutting (grinding), fine cutting (finishing), and then smoothing (polishing) the material after
polymerization.
Particle sizes in composites affect other properties as
well as fluidity. For example, filler particle size has a direct effect on the surface roughness of the ground, finished, or polished composite. Filler particles are harder
than the matrix. Thus during finishing, some particles
may be left protruding from the surface, while others
are stripped out of the surface leaving holes. If the particles are very small, then the resulting surface rough-

FIG . 4-64 Effect of particle size on surface finish of composite. A, Schematic illustration of fini shing midifill versus microfill composite surfaces. B, SEM view of coarsely finished midifill composite surface. (Courtesy Stephen C. Bayne, School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC.)

CHAPTER 4

ness is of little concern. This effect is illustrated schematically in Fig. 4-64. Otherwise, the rough areas may
contribute to light scattering and collection of organic
debris or stain.
Effectiveness of restoration finishing and polishing
procedures depends on careful use of successively finer
abrasive materials to eliminate larger scratches or defects and replace them with smaller ones. This process is
schematically summarized in Fig. 4-65. Final finish of
the composite surface is a result of the combination of
filler particle size effects and finishing scratches. Average roughness of the surface is recorded in terms of the
extent of hills and valleys measured on surface profiles.
The measurements can be collected with profilometers
(e.g., Surfanalyzer) or atomic force microscopes (AFM).
An example of an AFM image and the calculated surface
roughness, Ra, is demonstrated in Fig. 4-66. Surfaces

Dental Materials

Schematic summary of the microscopic events duri ng finishing and polishing operations. Rough surface is gradually cut away by finer and finer abrasives (coarse and fine fini shing). Polishing produces very little cutting but does tend to
smear material (burnishing) from remaining high spots into
l ow spots and create a smooth surface. The final surface finish
i s measured as the average up-and-down surface roughness
remaining (Ra) by profiling select areas of the surface.

FIG 4-65

FIG. 4-66 AFIVI view of a surface with an average roughness (Ra) corresponding to 0.2 um.
A, AFIVI image of finely finished miclifill composite (note the relief of filler particle margins produced by the finishing process). B, AFIVI image of finely finished minifill composte. (Courtesy
Thompson JY, School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.)

CHAPTER

TABLE

4-14

4

Dental Materials

Examples of Filler Level Ranges for Typical Composites in Terms of Weight and Volume Percent"

*The composites are reported using a classification system based on filler particle sizes. Systems that are not dental composites are reported in
brackets. Volume percent filler is always less in amount than weight percent filler for the same composition because the glass filler is denser than
the resin matrix. Typically, 75 weight percent filler is equal to 50 volume percent filler, as shown on the table.

with average roughness values of less than 1 um are
considered, clinically, very smooth. It is common to be
able to achieve surface smoothness in the range of 0.2 to
0.6 um using submicron polishing pastes on materials
that include submicron filler phases.
Classification. Composites generally are classified
with respect to the components, amounts, properties of
their filler or matrix phases, or by their handling properties. The most common classification method is based
on filler content (weight or volume percent), filler particle size, and method of filler addition. Composites also
could be defined on the basis of the matrix composition (BIS-GMA or UDMA) or polymerization method
(self-curing, ultraviolet light-curing, visible light-curing,
dual curing, or staged curing), but these do not communi-

cate as much information about the properties.
Almost all important properties of composites are improved by using higher filler levels. The only practical
problem is that, as the filler level is increased, the fluidity
decreases. Highly filled compositions typically contain
large filler particles, but as previously stated, this composition results in a rougher finished surface. Smaller filler
particles are used to guarantee that composites have a
relatively smooth finished surface; however, this choice
compromises the filler level possible and therefore the
material's properties.
The degree of filler addition is represented in terms
of the weight percent or volume percent of filler. Because silica fillers are approximately three times as
dense as acrylic monomer (or polymer), 75 weight percent filler is equivalent to approximately 50 volume
percent filler. Properties of composites are proportional
to the volume percent of the phases involved. But, it is
much easier to both measure and formulate composites
using weight percentages rather than volume percentages and, in dentistry, the weight percent is much more
commonly reported. A conversion of filler levels and cor-

responding classifications of composites is presented in
Table 4-14.
Filler particle sizes for the earliest composites averaged 10 to 20 um in diameter, with many of the larger
particles as large as 50 um (Figs. 4-67 and 4-68). At first,
there was no need to distinguish the particle size range
or ranges of composites because all commercial products were in approximately the same range. During the
evolution of formulations toward better finishing characteristics and greater resistance to wear, smaller and
smaller filler particles were used. Because the early filler
particles were relatively large, composites based on
those large fillers became known as macrofill materials.
The terms macrofill or macrofiller are preferred to macrofilled because they properly describe the filler particle
size and not the method of producing the mixture. During the course of composite evolution, nomenclatures
and classification systems have been neither consistent
nor uniform .33,58,121,135,212,246,259In the following sections,
composites are classified either in terms of their particle
size range or comparative finishing characteristics. Each
classification is presented.
Classification of composites based on the range of
filler particle size range has been partially developed by
That system is exseveral authors .
tended here to include the particle size by order of magnitude, acknowledging mixed ranges of particle sizes,
and distinguishing precured composite pieces as special
filler. Composite filler particles are called macrofillers in
the range of 10 to 100 um, midifillers from 1 to 10 um,
minifillers from 0.1 to 1 um, and mierofillers from 0.01 to
0.1 um. Very large individual filler particles, called megafillers, also have been used in special circumstances.
New ultrasmall fillers are being investigated that are
from 0.005 to 0.01 um in diameter and are called nanofillers. Accordingly, composites are classified by particle
size as megafill, macrofill, midifill, minifill, microfill, and

CHAPTER 4

nanofill. Composites with mixed ranges of particle sizes
are called hybrids, and the largest particle size range is
used to define the hybrid type (e.g., minifill hybrid)
because microfillers are normally the second part of the
mixture. If the composite simply consists of filler and
uncured matrix material, it is classified as homogeneous.
If it includes precured composite or other unusual filler, it is called heterogeneous. If it includes novel filler
modifications in addition to conventional fillers, then it
is called modified, such as fiber-modified homogeneous
minifill.
After the early macrofill composites, the next generation had fillers that were 8 to 10 l Lm in average size
( midifillers) and were originally designated fine particle
composites to imply their improved finishing characteristics. These new materials quickly became popular and
were used primarily for anterior restorations in place of
silicate cements and direct-filling resins. The category
soon became known as traditional or conventional composites, but that designation has become confusing as
newer composites continue to evolve with even smaller
particle size ranges. The next step in composite evolution was to utilize 0.02- to 0.04-um diameter particles to
produce microfill composites. The term microfiller was
already in common use for these particles in nondental
applications. Microfill composites also were called fine
finishing composites. The small filler particle size produced high viscosities in the uncured mixes of BIS-GMA
with TEGDMA and requires the addition of greater
amounts of monomer diluents, along with a reduced
overall filler content to maintain workable consistencies.
To circumvent part of the viscosity problem, two
strategies were developed. The first was to blend precured microfill composite with uncured material. Precured particles were generated by grinding cured composites to a 1- to 20-um sized powder. The precured

Dental Materials

FIG 4-68 SEM cross-sectional view of heterogeneous microfill composite. (Courtesy Stephen C. Bayne and Duane F. Taylor, School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC.)

particles become chemically bonded to the new material,
provide islands with better properties, and can be finely
finished. These variants are known as heterogeneous microfills (or organic filler composites). An example is
shown schematically in Fig. 4-67 and in a scanning electron micrograph in Fig. 4-68. Unmodified microfills are
called homogeneous microfills. A second approach has
been to sinter small filler particles into large but porous
filler particles, impregnate them with monomer, and

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

add the new particles to a microfill composite. Within
the local region of the sintered filler particle, the material
is highly filled and yet capable of being polished.
After it was realized that highly filled microfills were
difficult to use, composites were formulated with mixtures of particles in the microfiller range and 2 to 5 um
range. These bimodal distributions allowed higher filler
levels and still permitted good finishing. All types of
mixtures are known collectively as hybrid composites.
Currently, the principal particle size for newer materials
is in the 0.1 to 1 um range. These composites might be
called minihybrids.
New composites are being developed with nanofillers
that range in size from 0.005 to 0.01 um, which is below
the wavelength range for visible light (0.02 to 2 um).'
Because these particles do not interact with visible light,
they do not produce scattering or significant absorption.
Nonsilicate-based compositions can be used for nanofillers because they are effectively invisible. Nonsilicate
fillers do not tend to agglomerate in chains like typical
silica-based fillers. Nanofillers are so small that they fit
between several polymer chains. These characteristics
permit the opportunity to achieve very high filler loading
levels in composites while still maintaining workable
consistencies. Consideration of nanofillers, particularly
of compositions other than silica, complicates the classification system for composites even further. Potentially,
the composition will have to be stated along with the particle size range in order to identify the material structure.
Although the vast preponderance of filler in composite is equiaxed rough particles, there is increasing interest in fiber-reinforced systems. The main advantage of
fibers is that they have excellent strength in the primary
fiber direction. Unfortunately, it is difficult to efficiently
pack the fibers or orient their direction. Small additions
of fibers to regular fillers are effective in improving
properties. The limiting factor is that fibers only may be
used with dimensions greater than 1 um because of the
concerns for carcinogenicity of submicron fibers such as
asbestos. Most current fibers have diameters of 5 to 10
um and effective lengths of 20 to 40 um.
Single crystals generally have symmetric shapes and
are commonly long plates, behaving like fibers. Their
singular advantage is that they are much stronger than
noncrystalline or polycrystalline fibers. The strongest example of a crystal-modified composite is an experimental composition that employs SiC single crystals 265,266
Unfortunately the crystals are colored and not well
suited for esthetic compositions. However, in clinical
uses in which esthetics are not important, these crystalmodified composites could be very valuable.
Another consequence of advances in the control of
filler particle size, particle size distribution, particle
morphology, and monomer technology has been the introduction of composites with specific handling characteristics. These include flowable composites and packable
composites. Flowable composites are a class of low-

FIG. 4-69 Composite filler ranges versus particle size (shown
on a logarithmic scale).
viscosity materials that possess particle sizes and particles size distributions similar to those of hybrid composites, but with reduced filler content, which allows
the increased amount of resin to decrease the viscosity
of the mixture. Because flowable composites were developed with specific handling characteristics in mind,
their range of advertised clinical uses is quite varied.
Within the range of materials classified as flowable composites, those with lower filler content are intended for
uses such as pit-and-fissure sealants or small anterior
restorations. Those with higher filler content have been
suggested for use in Classes I, II, III, IV, and V restorations, although they are better suited only for very conservative restorative procedures. In general, the mechanical properties of flowable composites are inferior
to those of standard hybrid composites . 26,257
Packable composites, also referred to as condensable
composites, were developed in a direct effort to produce a
composite with handling characteristics similar to amalgam, thus the moniker of "packable" or "condensable."
These "amalgam alternatives" are intended primarily for
Class I and Class II restorations. The composition and
properties reported for early examples of this class of
composites suggest that they represent little or no improvement over traditional hybrid composites. 126,213 The
distinguishing characteristics of packable composites are
less stickiness and higher viscosity (stiffness) than traditional hybrid composites, which allows them to be placed
in a manner that somewhat resembles amalgam placement, although they do not truly undergo condensation
like amalgam. Because of this, "packable composite" is a
more appropriate description of this class of composites.
Examples of the filled composite designations are
shown in Fig. 4-67. Mean filler particle sizes of those
designations are shown in Fig. 4-69. Mean filler particle
sizes may often not correspond to any actual particle
size because of polydisperse distributions. Fig. 4-70
shows examples of the particle size distributions for
several composites. There is no practical limitation on
the complexity of filler particle compositions or particle
size distributions. New composites may be better described simply as polydisperse.
In addition to inorganic or composite fillers, it is possible to add crystalline polymer fillers. Some newer composites include crystalline polymer to supplement traditional fillers. Crystalline polymer is not nearly as strong
as inorganic filler, but it is stronger than amorphous
polymer material.

CHAPTER 4

Microfill and hybrid composites utilize microfillers of
Si02 that can be produced in a variety of ways and
therefore are designated with different names. Two basic forms are used in dental compositions. Colloidal silica
is chemically precipitated from a liquid solution as
amorphous silica particles. Pyrogenic silica is precipitated from a gaseous phase as amorphous particles.
The actual properties of each form are slightly different,
but the differences have not yet been shown to produce
different clinical properties for composites.
For posterior composite restorations, it is also possible
to place one or two large glass inserts (0.5- to 2-mm particles) into composites at points of occlusal contact or high
wear. These pieces of glass are referred to as inserts (or
megafillers). Although they have demonstrated improved
wear resistance to contact area wear, the techniques are
more complicated and do not totally eliminate contactfree area (CFA) wear. Furthermore, the bonding of the
composite to the insert is questionable.
Matrix monomers for composites used in the United
States traditionally have been based on BIS-GMA as the
primary monomer. UDMA has been more popular in
European composites. Initially, better adhesion and/or
resistance to color change was predicted for the UDMA
formulations, but clinical studies have not been able to
document these advantages.
Matrix monomers can be polymerized in a variety of
ways. The original composites adopted self-curing
chemistry that was typical of dental denture base compositions. These composites have been called self-cured,
chemically cured, or two-component systems. Amine accelerators that were used to increase polymerization rates,
however, contributed to discoloration after 3 to 5 years
of intraoral service. An alternative system was introduced that used ultraviolet light (UV light-cured) to initiate polymerization. The curing units required were of
limited reliability and presented some safety problems.
They, in turn, were replaced with visible light-cured
( VLC) or light-cured (LC) systems.
LC composites are the most popular today, but their

Dental Materials

FIG 4-71
Example of visible light-curing unit for use with
composites, bonding agents, and other light-curing materials.
The main power supply is connected to a pistol-grip light gun
that generates a beam that is passed through the fiber-optic
tube. A shield is supplied to protect against direct observation
of high-intensity light at the tip (Courtesy Kerr-Sybron,

Orange, Calif).
success depends on the access of high-intensity light to
cure the matrix material (Fig. 4-71). If the composite
thickness exceeds 1.5 to 2 mm, then the light intensity
can be inadequate to produce complete curing, especially with darker shades of composite. Filler particles
and coloring agents tend to scatter or absorb the curing
light in the first 1 to 2 mm of material. Darker shades
and microfills are more difficult to cure. Access to interproximal areas is limited and may require a special technique to guarantee adequate light-curing energy. Because of these problems, more and more composite
compositions are dual cured, combining self-curing and
light-curing. The self-curing rate is slow and is designed
to cure only those portions not adequately light-cured.
Another approach is to provide staged curing. In some
instances, composite finishing can be complicated by
relatively hard, fully cured material. By filtering the
light from the curing unit during an initial cure, it is
possible to produce a soft, partially cured material that
can be easily finished. Afterwards, the filter is removed
and the composite curing is completed with full spectrum visible light.

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

Light-Curing Variables. A key consideration for
light-curing in dentistry is the plethora of variables associated with the operation. Light-curing can be accomplished with quartz-tungsten-halogen (QTH) curing
units, plasma arc curing (PAC) units, laser curing units,
and light-emitting diode (LED) curing units. Examples of
each are shown in Fig. 4-72. Each has different operational characteristics but acts as a source of visible light
energy. The spectral output (intensity versus wavelength; Fig. 4-73) of different types of lights or different
commercial units may vary, but each one attempts to
maximize the light in the absorption range of the photoinitiator within the composite being cured. The vast
majority of current composites employ camphoroquinone as the photoinitiator, and it absorbs photons of
light energy, predominantly at 474 nm.
The challenge to effectively cure light-cured dental
materials is illustrated by the large number of variables
shown in Fig. 4-74. Light-curing variables are logically
grouped in terms of those associated with the: (1) curing
equipment, (2) clinical manipulation of the curing light,
and (3) restoration effects on curing light absorption.
Each of these is considered separately in the following
paragraphs.
Different categories of curing lights produce a spectrum of light in different ways. The problems of all are
illustrated by considering QTH light-curing systems.
Within the light-curing unit is a power supply that heats

a tungsten filament in a quartz bulb containing a halogen gas. The output of the bulb depends on the voltage
control and operational characteristics of the bulb. New
bulbs are not necessarily equivalent. Older curing units
often demonstrate voltage variations. A typical QTH
bulb is rated for 80 to 100 hours (approximately 2 1/2
years of average clinical practice use) but may last two
to three times as long under ideal conditions. Within the
light-curing unit, the light from the bulb is collected by
reflecting it from a silverized mirror behind the bulb toward the path down the fiber-optic chain to the tip. It is
extremely important that the mirror surface be kept
clean. This surface becomes heated during the operation
of the light and then cools down between uses. It often
condenses vapors from mercury, bonding system solvents, or moisture in the operatory air onto its surface,
dulling or clouding its surface. It is possible to routinely
clean this surface with alcohol or methyl ethyl ketone
solvents on cotton swabs to renew its reflection effectiveness. The reflector is parabolic in geometry (Fig. 4-75),
rather than being hemispherical, in order to focus the
light toward a small fiber-optic entry. Of the light produced, less than 0.5% is suitable for curing, and most is
converted at some point into heat. To minimize any
heating that might occur during light-curing, two filters
are inserted in the path of the light just before the fiberoptic system. The ultraviolet and infrared bandpass filters eliminate significant amounts of unnecessary light

A

B

C

D
FIG . 4-72 Examples of four types of visible light-curing units used to polymerize composite materials. A, QTH curing unit; B, plasma arc curing (PAC) unit; C, laser curing unit; D, light-emitting
diode (LED) curing unit. (A, Courtesy Bisco, 1100Irving Park Road, Schaumburg, lll. B, Courtesy
DMD Dental/Medical Diagnostic Systems, Inc., 6416 Uariel Avenue, Woodland Hills, Calif.
C, Courtesy LaserMed, West Jordan, Utah. D, Courtesy DMD Dental/Medical Diagnostic Systems, Inc., 6416 Variel Avenue, Woodland Hills, Calif.)

CHAPTER 4

and convert it into heat within the unit. A small fan is
used to dissipate unwanted heat from the filters and reflector. Bandpass filters can be made from special glass
or plastic coatings on clear glass. Filters may degrade as
they become fatigued by numerous heating and cooling
cycles.
Light passed through the fiber-optic bundle is emitted
from the tip of the curing unit. Some light intensity is
lost through the fiber-optic system. The output characteristics of the tip are generally not uniform, with high
intensity light observed in the center of the bundle.
Resin contamination on the curing unit tip tends to scatter the light, reducing the effective output quite a bit.
Therefore the tip should be cleaned of cured resin, when
necessary, using an appropriate rubber wheel on a slowspeed handpiece.
The curing light output can be monitored directly
with a built-in or portable radiometer or by trial-curing
of some composite material. However, the former approach is much more sensitive to curing problems. Most
modern curing lights include a convenient radiometer
as part of the unit that measures the number of photons
per unit of area per unit of time. Unfortunately, it does
not discriminate the light energy that is matched to the
photoinitiator. It measures all light energy. Thus, the real
value of the measurement is limited. Generally, QTH
curing lights functioning in the normal range have outputs from 400 to 800 mW/cm2. A good rule of thumb is

Dental Materials

ing on whether the curing unit tip is larger or smaller,
respectively. Shifting from a standard 11-mm diameter
tip to a small 3 mm diameter has the effect of increasing
the light output eightfold. This increases the chance that
heat produced in the curing procedure will raise the
temperature of the restoration and surrounding dentin
to much more dangerous levels. Increases in pulpal
temperatures of more than 5° to 8° C easily cause cell
death. 272,273

that the minimum output should never drop below 300 mW/
cm2: A radiometer is designed to measure the photon

level per unit time through a standard 11 mm diameter
window. Therefore smaller or larger curing unit tips
cannot be effectively tested. Light energy entering into a
fiber-optic bundle is diffused or concentrated depend-

FIG4-74

FIG. 4-73

FIG 4-75 I nternal operation of a QTH visible light-curing unit.
A, Schematic of a typical pistol grip handle attached to the
power supply for the unit.
Continued

Example of spectral output of QTH light-curing unit
compared to absorption range for camphoroquinone photoinitiator, which is in most bonding agents and composites
that are light-cured. Unabsorbed light is principally converted
i nto heat energy.

List of variables associated with visible light-curing
li nked to the equipment, manipulation procedure, and restorative material.

CHAPTER

FIG

4

Dental Materials

4-75, cont'd
B, Picture of a dissembled pistol grip of unit (Demetron, Kerr Dental Products)
showing light pipe (left), shield to prevent operator from directly viewing light tip, filters in light
path, light bulb and reflector, light socket, cooling fan ( behind socket), trigger, circuit board, and
wired connection to power supply. (8, Courtesy Kerr Dental Products, Orange, Calif.)

Light intensity influences on polymerization zone. A, Varying light intensity with width
and depth affects the degree-of-conversion of monomer-to-polymer, shape-of-cure, and depthof-cure. B, Proximity of curing light to the surface affects the depth of penetration of light into
the surface.
FIG . 4-76

Light emanating from the tip of a curing unit does not
maintain its intensity, but is scattered by molecules in
the air on the path to the restoration. Ideally the fiberoptic tip should be adjacent to the surface being cured,
but this would most likely cause the tip to be contaminated by the material being cured. The intensity of light
striking the composite is inversely proportional to the
distance from the tip of the fiber-optic bundle of the curing light to the composite surface. Ideally, the tip should
be within 2 mm of the composite to be effective (Fig. 4-76).

This is not possible in many dental procedures because
the anatomy of a tooth or the distance into the preparation extensions create geometric interference. Distances
of 5 to 6 mm often are encountered. At distances beyond
6 mm for QTH lights, the output may be less than one
third that at the tip. To permit closer approximation of
the curing light to the composite, light-transmitting wedges
have been promoted for interproximal curing, and lightfocusing tips have become available for access into proxi mal boxes .75 Smaller tips are very useful to overcome

CHAPTER 4

this problem but require many more light-curing cycles
to cover the same amount of cured area. Certain walls
containing bonding systems to be cured within complex
preparation extensions such as Class II restorations,
may not be oriented ideally to the curing light direction
and may still be undercured.
The composite itself also affects the light-curing process. Filler particles tend to scatter the light, and darker
colorants tend to absorb the light. Therefore it is generally recommended that no more than 1.5- to 2-mm increments
be light-cured at a time.
Smaller filler particles, in the
range of 0.1 to 1 um, interfere most with the light and
maximize scattering. That particle size corresponds to the
wavelength range for the photoinitiator used for curing.
Within a composite, the pattern of curing varies as a
function of curing tip radius and light penetration
depth into the material. The intensity of the tip output
generally falls off from the center to the edges. Therefore, bulk curing of composite produces a bullet-shaped
curing pattern. This may lead to inadequate curing in regions such as the proximal box line angles of Class II
restorations. The degree-of-conversion (or degree-of-cure)
is related to both the intensity of light and duration of
exposure. It decreases considerably with depth into a
composite material. Restorative materials based on BISGMA-like restorative matrices generally can only be
converted to 65% because of technical problems with
steric hindrance of the reacting molecules. Therefore,
65% would be considered a good degree of conversion.
A curing light may only produce a 55% degree of cure at
1 mm into a composite and even less at greater depths.
Clinically, it is impossible to distinguish differences in
the degree of cure. One can only detect the start of uncured material. The boundary between somewhat cured
and uncured material is called the depth of cure and is often as much as 5 mm for light Vita shades (A2 or A3) of
material, in which the tip is close to the composite.
However, in cases of poor access or darker shades it is
recommended that materials be placed and cured in increments of 1.5 to 2 mm. For the darkest shades, increments should be limited to 1 mm of thickness. Problems
of light penetration are only slightly overcome by increasing curing times.
Most light-curing requires a minimum of 20 seconds
for adequate curing under optimal conditions of access.
To guarantee adequate curing has occurred, it has become common practice to postcure for 20 to 60 seconds.
There is some evidence that postcuring (curing again after completion of the recommended curing procedure)
may slightly improve the surface layer properties such
as wear resistance.
Typical curing cycles of 20 seconds are laborious and
interest in much shorter ones is strong. It has been estimated that for a standard restorative practice during
the course of a normal year that as many as 40 hours
(typical work week) may be consumed solely with light-

Dental Materials

curing. Therefore, more intense curing units have been
developed to hasten the curing cycles. PAC lights and laser curing units are advertised with curing times of 3 to
10 seconds.
High-intensity light-curing involves a combination of
increased light output and a narrowed wavelength
range for the output, using more discriminating band
pass filters or other means. This process works well only
if the photoinitiator is coincident with the wavelength
range of the light source. However, some composites use
slightly different photoinitiators and those wavelengths
may have been excluded by the high-intensity light filters. Heat is also an important problem for these systems. Therefore a wide range of wavelengths that might
cover all available photoinitiators is not practical.
Under ideal curing conditions, improvement is observed, but there are accompanying risks as well. Highintensity lights also generate much more intense heat
with tissues. High-intensity lights do not necessarily
produce the same type of polymer network during curing. Rapid polymerization may produce excessive polymerization stresses and weaken the bonding system
layer against tooth structure. The physics of polymerization is much more complex than has yet been considered.
As noted earlier (see Materials Structure), acrylic
resin monomers used in dentistry undergo polymerization in stages named activation, initiation, propagation,
and termination. Activation involves the production of
free radicals. Initiation is the step in which free radicals
react with monomer units to create the initial end of a
polymer chain. Propagation is the addition of monomer
to the growing chain. Termination is the conclusion of
the process as a result of steric hindrance, lack of monomer, or other problems. Light-curing influences the initiation process. Increased light intensity increases the
amount of effective activation and the subsequent number of chains started. However, there is a practical point
at which it is no longer useful to encourage activation.
The stages in polymerization occur quickly already.
Activation and initiation occur in less than a second.
Early propagation rates are extremely fast (100,000 to
1,000,000 reactions per second). Therefore increased light
intensity is useful only to push the degree of conversion to
high levels deeper within a material.
However, the amount of unreacted material that remains is still of concern. If the degree of conversion is
65% in systems with difunctional or polyfunctional molecules, then this will include monomer that has at least
one site reacted to tie it into the polymer network and
some monomer that is totally unreacted. The unreacted
materials may diffuse out of the system. Current composites are complex mixtures that generally include two
or more principal monomers and these do not coreact
equally. Evidence is increasing that TEGDMA constitutes most of the unreacted monomer in the system. This
is apparently influenced by the activation step as well.

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

curing) has been explored. There is some evidence that

FIG . 4-77 Examples of the variety of duty cycles (intensity versus time) available with different types of light-curing units.

Rapid polymerization also affects the mechanical properties of the polymer network that is forming. As the first
polymerization occurs, only some monomer is consumed
and the system is still principally a viscous liquid. During
conversion from monomer to polymer, the formation of
new monomer-to-monomer bonds causes shrinkage, decreasing the net volume of the system. As long as the
system is a liquid, it deforms quickly. However, as the degree of conversion approaches 10% to 20% the network is
extensive enough to create a gel. Beyond the gel point,
polymerization shrinkage creates strain on the network
and the attachment area to the bonding system. Built-in
stresses are relieved ultimately but are considered deleterious at the time of curing because of potential effects
on restoration marginal walls. To decrease or eliminate
this problem, quite a range of altered curing cycles (staged

this approach to achieve "soft-start" polymerization
works for certain composites cured by specific curing
lights, but evidence is also strong that this is not a universal response for all systems.
The original stepped curing system was possible
with the Elipar Highlight (ESPE) in 1997. It produced a
100 mW/cm2 output for 10 seconds, followed by an immediate jump to 600 mW/cm 2 output for 30 seconds.
The presumption was that lower curing energy allowed
the newly forming polymer network to stress-relax and
eliminate strains before completion of the curing process.
A wide range of soft-start polymerization approaches
are possible (Fig. 4-77). Curing cycles may involve variable light intensities and variations in on-and-off periods during the cycle. Although there seems to be newly
discovered interest to understand these effects, all of
the curing cycles are complicated by the problems mentioned earlier such as light tip sizes, tip orientations,
material thickness, and material composition.
Alternatives to the wide range of challenges with
light-curing systems are few. One approach is to consider LED technology to generate the appropriate
wavelength and curing cycle. This eliminates many of
the current equipment problems. However, it does not
solve manipulation and restoration curing problems.
Other polymerization mechanisms also are being considered that do not include traditional acrylic
monomers. Whatever the final solution, it is extremely
i mportant that light-curing in general practice will
be economical, simple-to-manage, and extremely
reliable.
Composition, Structure, and Properties. Composites originally were designed for restoration of Classes

TABLE 4-15 Comparison of Properties of Representative Composites*

From Bayne SC et al: JAm Dent Assoc 129:567-577,1998; Leinfelder KF, Bayne SC, Swift El: J Esthet Dent 11:234-249,1999; Ruddell DE et al: J Dent
Res 78:156, 1999 (abstract 407); and Wilkerson MD et al: J Dent Res 77: 203, 1998 (abstract 779).
*Relative properties are shown in brackets. The values reported are from a variety of sources from 1963-2000, including manufacturer's product
bulletins. Comparisons should be made only in terms of general application requirements, and not in terms of any single property.

CHAPTER 4

III, IV, and V tooth preparations, but now are used in
modified forms for most other restorative dental uses.
Based on their intended application, they can be used in
all classes (I to VI) of restorations, cements, bases, cores,
veneers, or repair materials.
A summary of the composition, structure, and properties of five composite compositions is provided in
Table 4-15 as examples of commercially available materials. It should be noted that as the overall filler content increases, the physical, chemical, and mechanical properties
generally improve.

A physical property of historical concern has been the
LCTE. Tooth structure expands and contracts at a linear
rate of approximately 9 to 11 ppm/° C (see Materials
Properties). Unfilled acrylics (such as PMMA) have linear rates of 72 ppm/° C. The LCTE for composites (28 to
45 ppm/° C) may be almost twice as much as the value
for amalgam (25 ppm/ ° C) and three to four times greater
than that for tooth structure. Thus, during extreme intraoral temperature changes and times, significant stresses
may be generated at the tooth/ restoration interfaces
where composites are micromechanically bonded. If the
interfacial bond fails, microleakage may produce unesthetic staining, pulpal sensitivity due to dentinal fluid
flow, pulpal irritation due to diffusion of bacterial endotoxins, and/or predisposition toward recurrent caries.
Thermal changes alone do not produce significant thermal expansion problems. Polymeric and ceramic materials are insulators, have low thermal diffusivities, and
only change in temperature at relatively slow rates. Intraoral temperature changes of 20° to 30° C that involve only
20 to 30 seconds may be insufficient to produce any significant temperature change in either the tooth structure
or the composite. For this reason, much of the thermal cycling information from laboratory experiments may be of
little or no value in predicting clinical performance of
composite margins.
Well-cured composites are very resistant to chemical
change. However, most compositions only can be practi-

Dental Materials

stress, which could reduce the strength of the recently
formed bonding layer. Unbounded surfaces will distort,
when possible, to accommodate the stress.
In the 1980s, when composites were less highly filled
and bonding systems were not as reliable or strong, it
was quite possible that shrinkage stresses from composite curing actually dislocated the newly bonded surfaces
and created marginal openings. The consequences of
this process were first analyzed by Feilzer and others" ,"
and described in terms of the ratio (configuration factor, or
C -factor) of surface area of fixed walls bounding a tooth
preparation versus unbounded walls. C-factors for dental restorations typically range from 0.1 to 5.0 with higher
values (> 1.5) indicating more likelihood of high interfacial stresses (Fig. 4-78). Bulk-cured heterogeneous microfill systems in Class I situations were projected to generate preparation wall shrinkage stresses that exceeded
8 MPa. A key effect on actual stress is the complexity of
a dental tooth preparation. 79 The effect of tooth structure
deformation to accommodate potential stress is unknown. Light-cured composites develop higher stress
than auto-cured analogues, 81,117 and higher energy curSurprising lights further exacerbate the situation.
ingly, more highly filled composites produce larger bulk
polymerization stress .52 Contraction stresses in thin films
are much higher and decrease with increasing film
thickness .3,4, 46,61 Margin analysis in clinical situations has
shown evidence of disruption,"' but parallel studies
have not confirmed microleakage associated with this
problem. 112 Glass ionomers set more slowly and seem to
develop less interfacial stress .62
Because of its simplicity, this theory has been an attractive explanation for potential clinical problems. However, the real importance of these effects for current clinical systems may be much less. Many composites are
highly filled, placed incrementally, and less well cured

cally cured to levels of 55% to 65% degree of conversion of the

During conversion of monomer to
polymer, a composite undergoes polymerization shrinkage. In the early stages of conversion, there are only a
limited number of polymer chains and they are not well
connected (cross-linked). However, in the range of approximately 20% conversion, the polymer network is sufficient to create a gel. At this point, the system changes
from behaving like a liquid that can flow, to a solid that
has increasingly stronger mechanical properties. Therefore, during the first 20% or so of chemical reaction, the
accompanying polymerization shrinkage is accommodated by fluid changes in the dimension of the system.
However, after the gel point, polymerization shrinkage
produces both internal stresses within the network and
stresses along all the surfaces of the system. Bounded
surfaces of enamel and dentin may undergo some local
reactive monomer sites.

FIG. 4-78 C-factors associated with polymerization shrinkage
for different situations using dental restorative materials.
C-factors are the ratio of bound-to-unbound surface areas on
restorations and are shown in the figure as calculated using average estimates of dimensions of tooth preparations. C-factors
may be estimated as the ratio of the number of bound-to-unbound preparation surfaces and those are reported as well, but
do not necessarily produce the same numbers or order on the
scale.

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

with visible light than self-cured materials. Newer bonding systems are much more well bonded. Some newer
dentin bonding systems are designed thicker to be stress
relieving. Therefore typical wall stresses during curing
may actually be only 1 to 2 MPa, well within acceptable
ranges. The effects of wall stresses on postoperative sensitivity are not known. Stresses both within the cured
composite and along the walls appear to be relieved
quickly in a few hours. That process is accelerated by
the absorption of water .78
There has always been interest in eliminating the shrinkage of composites. Early investigations centered on the use
of ring-opening reactions with spiro-orthocarbonates to
produce expansion that would counteract normal shrinkage.'However, these materials were easily combined with
existing composite monomers. Recently, there has been a
strong interest in oxirane and oxitane chemistry as a
method of designing controlled-shrinkage composites that
undergo very little curing shrinkage compared to traditional composites.
Water absorption swells the polymer portion of the
composite and promotes diffusion and desorption of
any unbound monomer. Water and other small molecules can plasticize the composite and chemically degrade the matrix into monomer or other derivatives.
Beef or cholesterol esterase has been shown to produce
chemical decomposition of polymer matrices into formaldehyde and/or low molecular monomer species.

16-1,216 The consequences for the properties of the composite are obvious. The biologic consequences of small
releases of these materials are not known, although it
has been hypothesized that unreacted leachable monomer components, such as bisphenol-A, could act as estrogenic agents in the body. However, initial studies in
this area concluded that this is not likely to be a significant concern. 11,86,169,174
There is no clear relationship of clinical performance
to any single mechanical property. However, most investigators agree that stronger composites should resist intraoral occlusal stresses better in most situations.
Therefore, there is a general consensus that filler contents should be maximized. The material's elastic modulus is of concern as well. There is now evidence that
teeth deform more than previously suspected . 103 Composites with high elastic moduli may not be able to accommodate some changes in tooth shape that are associated with flexural forces. This limitation could then
result in debonding of the composite restoration from
enamel or dentin. This situation is more critical for cervical restorations on facial surfaces where flexural stresses
may produce large deformations (see Fig. 4-17). Flexible
restorations (low elastic modulus) would be clinically more retentive because of improved accommodation to flexural forces.
The opposite requirement would be true for large MOD
restorations. Composites in those cases should be very rigid
and thus minimize tooth flexure of remaining cusps.
Wear resistance of composites on occlusal surfaces of

posterior restorations has received considerable attention in clinical studies.39,102,105 ,125 ,175 ,256 At least five types
(Fig. 4-79) of composite wear events are based on the location on the restoration surface: (1) wear by food (contact-free area, or CFA wear), (2) impact by tooth contact in
centric (occlusal contact area, or OCA wear), (3) sliding by
tooth contact in function (functional contact area, or FCA
wear), (4) rubbing by tooth contact interproximally

Coupling
agent
FIG 4-79 Locations of different types of wear on posterior composite restorations.

Schematic view of wear of composite restoration.
(From Bayne SC, Taylor DF, Heymann HO: Dent Mater 8:305309, 1992.)

FIG . 4-80

CHAPTER 4

(proximal contact area, or PCA wear), and (5) wear from
oral prophylaxis methods (toothbrush or dentifrice abrasion). The relative contributions of these processes are
poorly understood.
Several mechanisms of wear are hypothesized on the
basis of clinical information for CFA wear on relatively
small posterior occlusal restorations. Mechanisms of
wear are associated with failure of composite components (Fig. 4-80). The microfracture theory proposes that
high modulus filler particles are compressed onto the
adjacent matrix during occlusal loading and this creates
microfractures in the weaker matrix. 114 With the passage
of time, these microfractures become connected, and
surface layers of the composite are exfoliated. The hydrolysis theory 234 purports that the silane bond between
the resin matrix and filler particle is hydrolytically unstable and becomes debonded. This bond failure allows
surface filler particles to be lost. The chemical degradation
theory 264 supposes that materials from food and saliva
are absorbed into the matrix, causing matrix degradation and sloughing from the surface. Finally, the protection theory33,115 proposes that the weak matrix is eroded
between the particles.
If a posterior occlusal restoration is narrow enough,
occlusal contact wear is significantly reduced or eliminated, and wear is due almost entirely to food bolus
contact (CFA wear [see Fig. 4-81, A]). It now appears
that CFA wear resistance is not related to composite mechanical strength, but rather to filler spacing. Filler particles are much harder than the polymer matrix, and
thus resist wear very well. If filler particles are closely
spaced, then they shelter the intervening matrix polymer. This is called microprotection (see Fig. 4-81, B). In
microfill composites the particles are very small, and
thus the interparticle spacing is very small . 33 As a result,

Dental Materials

microfills, even with their low filler contents, show very
good CFA resistance. However, if their strengths are
low, then they do not resist direct tooth contact wear
forces very well. Composite restorations with relatively
narrow tooth preparations minimize food bolus contact
and provide sheltering of the restoration. This process is
called macroprotection (see Fig. 4-81, A). The size of the
anticipated restoration is a good indication for the discretionary use of posterior composite materials. If the
tooth preparation is narrow, then composites can be used with
little concern about wear. If the tooth preparation is wide,
and/or is located in a molar tooth (which is most frequently
involved in masticating the food bolus), then the restoration
will be more susceptible to wear.
Large, extensive posterior composites that include total
occlusal contact coverage are more prone to failure because
of impact (OCA wear) and fatigue (FCA wear).
If the
opponent teeth contact only the composite restoration,
then undesirable composite wear usually occurs at those
contacts. However, this process is restricted if centric contacts remain on enamel elsewhere in the restored tooth.
Wear resistance of posterior composites has been
evaluated extensively in longitudinal clinical studies at
the University of North Carolina 2$- 105,208,238,240,254,256 and
the University of Alabama 125 over 20 years. Results of
this research have demonstrated that microfill composites
are the most wear-resistant formulations, although as of
the year 2000, most commercially available restorative
composites (microfills, hybrids, packables) display extremely low in vitro and in vivo wear rates. Numerous
in vitro wear simulators have been investigated over
more than 30 years to try to duplicate the complicated
combination of intraoral wear events. Only one device121 (Leinfelder wear tester) has demonstrated excellent correlation with a wide range of clinical results.

FIG 4-81 Protection theory of CFA wear. A, Macroprotection of composite by sheltering effect
of narrow tooth preparation. B, Microprotection of matrix resin from small abrasive particles in
a food bolus is created by close interparticle spacing of filler particles. Interparticle spacing is
reduced from midifill composites (left) to minifill composites (right). (From Bayne SC, Taylor DF,
Heymann HO: Dent Mater 8:305-309, 1992.)

CHAPTE R4

Dental Materials

Several other devices are used routinely to measure in
vitro wear (Krejci wear simulator;
Ferracane wear
simulator)
Toothbrush (and toothpaste) abrasion of composites
is poorly understood. There is no direct evidence from
anterior composites that this process occurs other than
at very low rates. Still, some intuitive thinking suggests
that aggressive tooth brushing may produce significant
abrasion. Recent studies on flowable composites demonstrate that they wear more than sealants. 219
Clinical Considerations. Composites are monitored
in clinical studies by using United States Public Health
o f interest: color matchService (USPHS) categories
ing, interfacial staining, secondary caries, anatomic form
( wear), and marginal integrity.
Color matching not only depends on proper initial
color match, but also on the relative changes that occur
with time. Both the restoration and tooth structure are
known to change in color with age. The assessment is
made with the tooth structure properly hydrated. Temporarily drying the tooth structure makes it appear
lighter and whiter in color because of dehydration of
enamel (refer to the discussion of optical properties in
Materials Properties). With time, chemical changes in
the matrix polymer may cause the composite to appear
more yellow. This process is accelerated by exposure to
UV light, oxidation, and moisture. Anterior restorative
materials with high matrix contents that are self-cured
are more likely to undergo yellowing. Newer systems
that are visible light-cured, contain higher filler contents, and are modified with UV absorbers and antioxidants are more resistant to color change.
Even if a composite is relatively color stable, tooth
structure undergoes a change in its appearance over time
because of dentin darkening from aging. Aged tooth
structure appears more opaque and darker yellow. The
clinical challenge is to match the rate and type of color
change of the restoration with the tooth structure. A
color mismatch that appears after several years is difficult to avoid. Dentin is likely to change color most
rapidly during middle age (35 to 60 years old).
Bleaching of teeth (see Chapter 15) has become extremely popular (both in-office and home bleaching).
This complicates the process of trying to establish and
maintain good color match of an anterior restoration to
adjacent tooth structure. If bleaching occurs as a treatment of fixed duration, restorative procedures should
be postponed until after teeth have assumed a stable
lighter shade. However, continual bleaching or on-andoff bleaching ("data bleaching" or "weekend bleaching")
generally makes it impossible for the restoration shade
to perfectly match tooth color. Newer whitening toothpastes and continual bleaching may have some effect on
restoration surfaces as well, but these are not known.
Another important consideration for esthetics is a
gradual transition in color and translucency between

the restoration and tooth structure. This goal is accomplished in two ways. Beveling the enamel tends to blend
any color difference associated with the margin over
approximately 0.5 to 1 mm (depending on the preparation size and requirements for bevel width), rather than
making it abrupt. This step is particularly beneficial for
anterior restorations. It also produces more surface area
for a well-bonded margin that does not leak. Marginal
leakage leads to the accumulation of subsurface interfacial staining that is difficult or impossible to remove and
creates a marked boundary for the restoration appearance. Restorations that have been properly acid-etched
should be well bonded for years. The longevity of micromechanical enamel retention is unknown. Likewise
the effects of fatigue stresses or other intraoral events
are unknown. However, clinical studies as long as 14
years indicate relatively good resistance to interfacial
staining.
As long as margins are well bonded and no marginal
fractures occur, resistance to secondary caries should be
good. Although not well documented, most secondary
caries seems to occur along proximal or cervical margins
where enamel is thin, less well-oriented for bonding, difficult to access during the restorative procedure, and potentially subject to flexural stresses as well. Only rarely is
secondary caries observed along margins on occlusal
surfaces or noncervical aspects of other surfaces . 156 The
incidence of caries is quite variable, depending largely
on the degree of technical excellence during composite
placement. Clinical research studies indicate that for wellcontrolled insertion techniques the incidence of secondary
caries after 10 years can be as low as 3%.z 4 Under these circumstances, the primary reason for composite failure is
poor esthetics or excessive wear. Cross-sectional studies
of dental practices that did not strictly conform to recommended techniques indicate that caries levels as high
as 25% to 30% have been observed after 10 years for composites placed during the 1970s and early 1980s.
The principal concern for posterior composites has
been that occlusal wear could occur at a high rate and
continue over long periods of time, exposing underlying dentin and leading to secondary caries or sensitivity.
Excellent evidence from clinical research studies for
small- to medium-width restorations now indicates the
rate of occlusal wear tends to decrease over time, with
total wear approaching an average limiting value of
approximately 250 lLm over approximately 5 years (Fig.
4-82). Wear-resistant composites still wear but take
longer to reach that level of wear. Evidence that composites actually wear to the point of exposing underlying dentin is only minimal. Morever, after many years of
clinical service, worn restorations can be repaired simply by rebonding a new surface onto the old composite
to replace a worn or discolored surface.
Wear of posterior composite restorations has been compared in references to that for amalgams, but this compar-

CHAPTER

ison may be misleading. Occlusal amalgams do wear but
the wear is gradually compensated by continuing expansion of the restoration. Therefore the amalgam restoration
appears to have the same occlusal contour. Although this
expansion may be a functional advantage, the biologic effects of the wear of the amalgam are not known.
Marginal integrity of composites is very good under
most circumstances. Clinical appearance is affected by the
nature of the margin. Butt joint margins emphasize composite wear more than beveled margins. Butt joint margins of well-bonded restorations wear more slowly and
create a meniscus appearance against the enamel. However, as beveled composite margins wear, thinner edges
of material are produced that are more prone to fracture.
Bulk fracture of posterior composite restorations is
rare. Although there has been a persistent rumor that microfill composites are more subject to fracture at OCRs,
there is no published evidence of that fact, except for a
few restorations. 105 Whereas bulk fracture may be the
most prevalent failure mechanism for high-copper amalgam restorations, it is only rarely observed for intracoronal composite restorations.
Another clinical concern for all restorative material
procedures has been the occurrence of postoperative sensitivity. Actual causes of this event are poorly researched
but are hypothesized to be due to either: (1) marginal diffusion of species that induce fluid flow within dentin or
(2) dimensional changes of the restoration itself. Contraction resulting from polymerization shrinkage and/
or expansion from water sorption can cause flexure of
bonded cusps and produce pain. The incidence of postoperative sensitivity for posterior composite restorations is relatively low. In most cases, it occurs within
the first 6 months to 1 year of the procedure and subsides
within 6 months of initial onset. Only rarely must a posterior composite be removed to manage the problem . 22
There are only limited problems of biocompatibility for
most composites with the dental pulp. Although the unpolymerized materials are potentially cytotoxic and may
even have been classified as carcinogenic, they are very
poorly soluble in water and are polymerized into a
bound state before there is significant time for dissolution and diffusion. Monomers that do not polymerize
may diffuse slowly out of the restoration, but the concentration of released monomer at any given time is so low
that the materials do not appear to represent any practical risk. As noted with mercury migration from amalgam
restorations, concentration and time are the key factors
in assessing biohazards. However, these events still need
to be examined more closely. From long-term clinical stud
ies there is no evidence of any clinical problems resulting in
pulp death or soft tissue changes with the use of composite.

GLASS IONOMERS
Terminology and Classification. Glass ionomers are
materials consisting of ion-cross-linked polymer ma-

A

g

4

Dental Materials

TIME (years)

TIME (years)
Clinical wear curves for posterior composite restorations. A, Continually decreasing wearrate until the wear
almost stops as a result of sheltering from occlusal preparation
margins of small-to-moderate-sized posterior restorations.
B, Pooled average of clinical wear for several types of UVcured posterior composte restorations monitored over
17 years. (From Wilder AD Jr et al: Seventeen-year clinical
study of ultraviolet-cured posterior composite Class I and 11
restorations, J Esthet Dent 11:135-42, 1999.)
FIG 4-82

trices surrounding glass-reinforcing filler particles. The
earliest glass-ionomer materials for restorations were
based on a solution of polyacrylic acid liquid that was
mixed with a complex alumino-silicate powder containing calcium and fluoride. The acidic liquid solution
(pH = 1.0) dissolves portions of the periphery of the silicate glass particle, releasing calcium, aluminum, fluoride, silicon, and other ions. Divalent calcium ions are
quickly chelated by ionized carboxyl side groups on
polyacrylic acid polymer chains, cross-linking the chains
and producing an amorphous polymer gel. During the
next 24 to 72 hours, the calcium ions are replaced by
more slowly reacting aluminum ions to produce a more
highly cross-linked matrix that is now mechanically
stronger . 261 It is now believed that during the maturation involving aluminum ion cross-linking, silicon ions
and unbound water participate in producing an inorganic comatrix best described as a hydrated silicate. 173
The same carboxylic acid side groups also are capable of chelating surface ions on the glass particles, or

208

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

calcium ions from the tooth structure. This process generates true chemical bonds at all internal and external
interfaces when the reaction conditions are correct. Set
materials have modest properties compared with composites but have relatively good adhesion and the ability to release fluoride ions from the matrix for incorporation into neighboring tooth structure to suppress caries.
The perceived advantages of adhesion and fluoride release have driven more than 30 years of intense research
to improve glass-ionomer products to the point of being
competitive with other restorative materials options.
Historical Development. The design of the original
glass-ionomer cements was a hybrid formulation of silicate and polycarboxylate cements. Glass ionomers used
the aluminosilicate powder from silicates and the polyacrylic acid liquid of polycarboxylates. The earliest commercial product was named using the acronym for this

hybrid formulation and was called aluminosilicate polyacrylic acid (ASPA). The different types of compositions
and certain variables that have been explored are summarized in Box 4-2. A schematic of the various chemical
reactions involved in the setting and adhesion of glassionomer compositions is shown in Fig. 4-83.
A significant number of liquid and powder modifications were soon incorporated to improve the physical,
chemical, and mechanical properties. Despite these
changes, however, early materials were very technique
sensitive. Mixing, placement, and early intraoral conditions were critical to the properties achieved. 111,114
The original polyacrylic acid in the liquid component
was modified by copolymerization with different
amounts of maleic acid, itaconic acid, and/or tartaric
acid to increase the stability of the liquid and modify its
reactivity. Powder particles were reduced in size and
modified by incorporating additional types of powder
particles for reinforcement. Ag-Sn particles (amalgam
alloy particles) were admixed in some formulations to
produce an amalgam substitute. This combination became known as the "miracle mixture" because it was initially introduced during the early 1980s at the time when
the mercury controversy was increasing dentists' questions about the safety of amalgams. However, the propVariety of Compositions and Changes
in the Evolution of Glass Ionomer
Materials

FIG 4-83 Schematic view of setting and adhesion reactions for
a variety of glass ionomer compositions. Traditional glass ionomers: A, Ions released from periphery of alumino-silicate glass
particle by acid. B, Divalent Ca ions initially cross-link adjacent
carboxyl ions on polymer chains to cause setting. C, Trivalent AI
i ons gradually replace divalent Ca ions and form tighter network of cross-links between polymer chains. D, Si ions react
with available water and form covalent silicate network. E, Pendant carboxyl groups on polymer chains chelate surface ions on
powder particles to produce internal bonding. F, Pendant carboxyl groups on polymer chains chelate surface ions on tooth
structure to produce chemical bonding. Glass ionomers that are
metal-modified for mechanical reinforcement. G, Cermet filler
particles with ceramic coatings are bonded to pendant carboxyl
groups on polymer chains. Hybrid or resin-modified glass ionomers. H, Acrylic functional modifications of polymer allow lightcuring to cause initial cross-linking. l, Water soluble monomers
added for polymerization during light-curing reactions. J, Resin,
silica, or composite filler particles added as modifiers.

1. Traditional glass ionomers (liners, bases, cements)
Modified by adding comonomers to polyacrylic
acid
Smaller powder particle size
Experimentation with dehydrated liquid component
2. Metal-modified glass ionomers (filling materials,
bases, cores)
Miracle mixtures (with amalgam alloy admixed
with cement)
Cermet-particle reinforced
3. Light-cured glass ionomers (liners, bases)
HEMA added to liquid component; monomers in
li quid modified with acrylic functional groups
Other powder particles mixed with alumino-silicate
glass
4. Hybrid (resin-modified) glass ionomers (cements,
restorative filling materials, cores)
HEMA and other monomers added to liquid component
Polymers and other phases added to powder
component
Silicate glass of composites substituted for some
of the powder component
Precured glass ionomer blended into composites
5. Polyacid-modified resign composites (compomers)
( cements, restorative filling materials, cores)
Methacrylate monomers with multiple carboxylic
groups; addition of ion-leachable glass (as in a
conventional glass ionomer)
HEMA, Hydroxyethyl methacrylate.

CHAPTER 4

erties of miracle mixtures were far inferior to amalgam,
and it was not well received as a restorative material. In
part, the problem with the admixture was that the matrix
would not strongly adhere to the Ag-Sn alloy particles.
To circumvent this difficulty, silver-palladium (Ag-Pd)
was substituted. Ag-Pd generates a passivating oxide
film of PdO that is chemically reactive by chelation with
polyacrylic acid. These mixtures, termed ceramic-metal
(cermets) mixtures (see Fig. 4-83, B), were much stronger
than unmodified glass-ionomer cements, but had poor
esthetics and could not be highly modified, or else they
would not set as well.
In the face of limited success with these modifications,
glass-ionomer compositions were promoted for less demanding applications, such as liners, bases, cements,
cores, and root canal filling materials, rather than as
restorative materials. During the 1980s the utilization of
glass ionomers for such applications increased. However, glass ionomers were plagued by technique sensitivities due to mixing requirements, potential problems
with postoperative sensitivity, and the need for moisture
protection to prevent surface degradation before the
secondary setting reaction was completed. With careful
attention to procedural details, glass ionomers have
proven clinically successful in many applications."'
However, in restorative filling applications, glass ionomers have never been as esthetic as composites.
In the early 1990s reformulated ionomer-based materials were introduced. The modified materials are based
on modifications that replace part of the original glass-

TABLE 4-16

Dental Materials

ionomer formulation with alternative filler particles and/
or matrix setting reactions to make them more composite-like (see Fig. 4-83, H toJ). 155 These materials are categorized as hybrid or resin-modified glass ionomers. They are
usually light-cured, less technique sensitive, and may be finished at the time of placement. Although more compositelike in composition and structure, resin-modified glass
ionomers still undergo acid-base reactions during setting and retain much of the chemical behavior of traditional glass-ionomer materials. Because resin-modified
glass ionomers are significantly stronger than traditional
glass ionomers, they are recommended for Class V restorations and can be used for Class I and Class II
restorations in primary teeth.
The most recent evolution of glass-ionomer chemistry
is the class of materials known as polyacid-modified resin
composites or compomers. 93,149,154,214,231 These materials are
similar to resin-modified glass ionomers in that they contain all the major components of both polymer-based
composites and glass ionomers, with the exception of
water. Water is excluded to prevent premature setting of
the material and also to ensure that setting occurs only
through a polymerization reaction. Limited acid-base
reactions are believed to occur once the material is exposed to, and absorbs, water. Although the name compomer implies that the material possesses a combination of characteristics of both composites and glass
ionomers, these materials are essentially polymer-based
composites that have been slightly modified to take advantage of the potential fluoride-releasing behavior of

Comparison of Compositions, Structures, and Properties of Typical Examples of Three Broad
Classes of Glass lonomers

Adapted from McCabe JF: Biomaterials 19:521-527,1998; Meyer JM, Cattani-Lorente MA, Dupuis V: Biomaterials 19:529-539,1998; and Smith DC:
Biomaterials 19:467-478,1998. NA, Not applicable, VLC, visible light-cured.

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

glass ionomers. The mechanical properties of polyacidmodified resin composites are superior to those of traditional glass ionomers and resin-modified glass ionomers, and in some cases, are equivalent to those of
contemporary polymer-based composites.
Composition, Structure, and Properties. Examples
of a traditional glass-ionomer cements, resin-modified
glass ionomers, and polyacid-modified resin composites (compomers) are listed in Table 4-16 along with certain key properties.
Clinical Considerations. The mainstay arguments
for glass ionomer use are chemical adhesion and fluoride release. Despite intuitive belief in benefits due to
these properties, little clinical evidence indicates that
these systems produce better restorations than systems
based on composites. Relative advantages of these two
factors and other considerations are discussed in this
section.
Adhesion of conventional glass ionomers (not resinmodified) to enamel and/or dentin only produces macroshear bond strengths in the range of 6 to 12 MPa. By
comparison, dentin bonding agents now can produce
bond strengths of 22 to 35 MPa. Most glass ionomers are
aqueous systems (before setting) and wet tooth structure very well because they are hydrophilic. However,
glass ionomers tend to have relatively high viscosities
and therefore do not flow and adapt to micromechanical spaces very readily. In contrast, bonding agents are
hydrophobic, but have been formulated for use with hydrophilic primers to facilitate wetting, flow, and bonding. Bonding of glass ionomers is achieved in part by
mechanical retention and in part by chemical chelation.
Although there always has been enchantment with
chemical bonding for dental systems, the bond density
per unit area of retentive interface is actually higher for
mechanical bonding than for chemical bonding. Excel-

lent bonding cannot be achieved by chemical bonding
alone. In most cases, good mechanical bonding is much more
important than chemical bonding. Thus, the potential of
glass ionomers for chemical bonding is only an advantage in situations in which it is difficult or impossible to
produce effective micromechanical retention.
Historically, widespread evidence indicates that little
secondary caries is associated with fluoride-containing
silicate cement restorations, despite significant marginal
disintegration during restoration solubilization. That
same success is expected with glass ionomers, but the
pattern has never been directly demonstrated. Two factors limit the influence of fluoride ion release. First, fluoride ion release is proportional to the concentration
available to diffuse from the matrix and/or residual silicate particles through to the restoration surface. Generally, fluoride ion release is relatively high during the
first few days but that rate of release falls as fluoride
concentration is depleted in the matrix (Fig. 4-84). A crit-

ical level of fluoride release over time never has been defined
clinically. The second and more important factor is that
the absence of significant secondary caries is not evidence of a fluoride ion effect. As noted in the clinical
considerations section for posterior composites, for appropriately placed restorations, the incidence of secondary caries can be less than 3% at 10 years even in the
absence of fluoride release. No clinical evidence indicates that glass-ionomer restorative materials can produce comparable or better results. Esthetic problems
with glass ionomers have resulted in replacement or repair in much less than 10 years after placement. Therefore fluoride release from restorations may not be a major advantage if other factors do not favor long-term
service.
Nonetheless, fluoride release from restorative materials such as glass ionomers may have therapeutic effects

FIG . 4-84 Fluoride release. A, Possible sources of fluoride within set cements. B, Examples of
fluoride release rates from glass ionomer cements versus time.

CHAPTER

that have yet to be demonstrated. Glass-ionomer restorations seem very well suited for situations that involve
high-caries risks. These include patients who are known
to be more susceptible to caries, patients with reduced
or no saliva flow, or patients with oral diseases that accelerate the pathogenic activities associated with caries.
In some cases, when bonding composite to gingival areas with little or no enamel, a glass-ionomer liner extended just short of the margins has been suggested as
a way to reduce caries risks if microleakage occurs.
Around 1990, a special form of temporary filling material was fabricated from glass ionomer with the objective of maximum fluoride release for use in the atraumatic restorative treatment ( ART) technique. In locations,
such as rural regions of underdeveloped countries, in
which treatment was not accessible or routine treatment
was not possible, untrained dental personnel could use
ART to halt or lessen the progression of frank carious lesions until the patient could access dental facilities.
An ART technique restoration is based on a self-cured
version of resin-modified glass ionomer that is mixed as
powder with liquid and is capable of a relatively high
fluoride release. A frank lesion is excavated using a simple plastic scoop. The temporary restoration is mixed by
rubbing the materials together between the tips of the
thumb and forefinger and inserted into the tooth excavation. Biting onto the restoration, the patient creates some
gross anatomy and occlusal adjustment. Since their development, these materials also have been adapted as
good temporary restorations for indirect restoration
techniques in dental offices.
Fluoride release from glass ionomer and other compositions is diffusion limited and affected by the concentrations in both the matrix and the particles (see Fig. 4-84,
A). For glass ionomers, the initially high burst of fluoride release is due to the high concentration of fluoride
that exists in the matrix immediately after the setting reaction is complete. During the initial acid dissolution of
powder particle edges, a large amount of fluoride becomes part of the reaction product matrix. This fluoride
diffuses quickly from the matrix exposed on the surface
of the material and is only slowly replaced by fluoride
diffusing from greater distances in the matrix below the
surface or by fluoride diffusing from the particles into
the matrix for the first time. Therefore the long-term release of fluoride is at much lower rates (see Fig. 4-84, B).
Biocompatibility of traditional glass-ionomer cements
has been a clinical concern. Traditional glass ionomers
are very acidic at the time of initial mixing and have the
potential to produce postoperative sensitivity and pulpal irritation. As the reaction proceeds, the pH increases
from initial values near 1 to a range of 4 to 5. As the setting reaction nears completion, the final pH value
reaches 6.7 to 7. Because the acid groups are attached to
polymer molecules that have limited diffusibility, the
potential pulpal effects of the low initial pH are limited

4

Dental Materials

to areas immediately adjacent to the material. If the RDT
is less than 0.5 mm, it may be necessary to protect dentin surfaces from direct contact with unset glass-ionomer materials
by using a calcium hydroxide liner. When fluid-filled denti-

nal tubules are in direct contact with setting cement,
two problems occur. High ionic concentrations in the
unset glass ionomer cause dentinal fluid to rapidly diffuse outward into the cement. This phenomenon produces a change sensed by pressure receptors near pulpal odontoblasts and causes pulpal sensitivity or pain.
At the same time, unset components, such as hydrogen
ions, may move into tubules and toward the pulp. This
may cause chemical irritation when RDT is inadequate.
Tubule fluid contents will be inadequate to buffer the
acid before it can diffuse to the pulp. The key to successful use of these materials is strict attention to specific
techniques. The risks for postoperative sensitivity with
resin-modified glass ionomers and compomers seem to
be much lower.
To increase mechanical strength, glass-ionomer materials for use as restorations are mixed at higher powder-to-liquid (or filler-to-matrix) levels than materials
used for luting. The reduced matrix content decreases
the risks of postoperative sensitivity or pulpal problems. In addition, tooth preparations may be lined with
calcium hydroxide that provides a barrier to the diffusion of unset glass-ionomer components while the material is curing.

DIRECT-FILLING GOLD
Gold is extremely malleable and may be welded to itself
under pressure at room temperature if the surfaces being joined are clean. This makes gold a candidate for a
direct restoration. Although it has been used this way
for more than a century, the process is tedious, demanding, and relatively expensive for the patient. These
reasons, in addition to the fact that the restoration is not
esthetic nor trouble free, has resulted in disuse of this
technique by most general practitioners.
Terminology and Classification. Gold for direct-filling
restorations may be classified on the basis of (1) the geometric form in which it is supplied, (2) the surface condition of the piece, and (3) the microstructure of the piece.
It may be supplied as ropes, sheets, strips, or pellets (see
Chapter 21). The surface condition is described as cohesive (clean) or noncohesive (containing adsorbed gas). To
prevent unwanted adsorption of hard-to-remove gases,
the gold piece may be intentionally protected by ammonia gas adsorption. At the time of use, the ammonia
layer is removed easily by properly heating the piece,
making it cohesive once again. Different microstructural
conditions are possible in forms referred to as gold foil,
mat gold, or powdered gold.
Composition, Structure, and Properties. Direct gold
is essentially 100% gold. Pre-alloying with other elements would reduce the weldability and malleability at

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

FIG.4-85 Bar graph comparing the flexural strengths and densities of different direct filling
golds for conditions of hand condensing versus mechanical condensing for cold welding. (Data
from Anusavice K. Phillips' science of dental materials, ed 10, Philadelphia, 1996, WB Saunders.)

room temperature. However, other elements may be incorporated (platinum or calcium) indirectly into the final structure by layering them onto the gold in forms
such as gold foils.
During cold welding, much greater compaction pressures are required to remove pores or spaces in mat gold
and powdered golds than in gold foil. However, these
other forms are often used because they reduce the time
required to build up a restoration. Restorations of mat or
powdered golds are never quite as dense as those made
from gold foil, and thus the former have lower flexural
strengths. The theoretic density for defect-free pure gold
is 19.3 g/cm 3, but as can be seen by reference to Fig. 4-85,
final restorations range from 14.3 to 15.9 g/cm 3 .
Clinical Considerations. The LCTE of gold is 16.2
ppm/°C, which is closer to tooth structure (9 to 11
ppm/°C) than all other currently available direct
restorative materials except for traditional glassionomer cement. There is very little differential expansion at the margins of the restoration and percolation is
not a problem.
Placing a liner or base may result in compaction and
welding problems. Gold foil is not indicated for restoring extensive lesions. Sometimes there is pulpal sensitivity to a thermal stimulus because of gold's high conductivity. However, this usually ceases after several months.
Direct-filling gold restorations have transverse
strength significantly lower than that for cast alloys (five
to six times lower) and less than that for tooth structure
(two times lower). Because direct gold has a low elastic
li mit, large restorations cannot adequately distribute occlusal stresses without plastic deformation.

Another major disadvantage is that direct-filling gold
restorations are not adhesive to tooth structure. Therefore they cannot function to reinforce tooth structure in
a manner similar to that for strong, properly bonded
composites or bonded ceramic restorations.
Finally, gold foil cannot be considered an esthetic
restorative material. Most patients are less than pleased
by its appearance.
I NDIRECT RESTORATIVE
DENTAL MATERIALS

Traditional stages of fabricating dental restorations by
indirect restorative techniques involve impressions, dies,
wax patterns, investing, casting or molding, finishing
and polishing, and cementing. CAD/CAM approaches
are possible as well, and are discussed in a later section,
Machined Restorations. Because of the multiple stages
of these techniques, errors that enter into the procedures
at any point tend to be compounded and carried into
the next stage. It is important to strictly adhere to the
procedural details throughout the techniques, or else the
final restoration will not fit. Those clinical procedures
that involve impression materials, choice of restorative
materials, and cementing of restorations are discussed in
Chapters 14, 15, and 20. The rationale for these procedural choices is discussed in this section in a limited way.
I MPRESSION MATERIALS
Terminology and Classification. Impression materials are used to record the surface topography and detail
of hard and soft tissues, and thereby produce a mold for
making a replica (cast) of those structures. Nine types of

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

T ABLE 4-17 Classification of Dental Impression Materials

ZOE, Zinc oxide-eugenol

impression materials have been used historically in dentistry. Their generic compositions, common names, and
key clinical properties are summarized in Table 4-17.
Plaster, impression compound, and ZOE are rigid solids
incapable of being removed directly from undercut areas of hard or soft tissues. Therefore they have limited
use for dentulous patients. Alginate (irreversible hydrocolloid) and reversible hydrocolloid (agar-agar) are elastic and
have the advantage of wetting intraoral surfaces well,
but have very limited dimensional stability because
they include as much as 85% water in their composition.
Polysulfide (rubber base, Thiokol rubber), silicone (condensation silicone, conventional silicone), polyether, and polyvinyl
siloxane (vinyl polysiloxane, addition silicone, addition polydimethyl siloxane) are nonaqueous polymer-based rubber
impression materials that have good elasticity (see Table
4-17). They are listed in order of development. Polyvinyl siloxane is the most widely used.
Composition, Structure, and Properties. To be totally effective, an impression material must be fluid before setting, hydrophilic to wet intraoral surfaces, highly
elastic to prevent permanent distortion during removal,
sterilizable, dimensionally stable, compatible with the
cast material, and must undergo complete conversion to
an elastic solid. To meet these mechanical requirements,
the most common formulation for an impression material is a mixture of nonreactive filler with a flexible polymer matrix.
Elastomeric polymer matrices are produced by polymerizing fluid monomer and/or oligomer mixtures
either by stepwise polymerization or chain reaction
polymerization reactions. Polysulfide, condensation silicones, and polyether impression materials involve stepwise polymerization.
Stepwise reactions are relatively slow and do not go
to completion for several hours. Approximately 65% to
85% conversion occurs within 6 to 8 minutes during initial setting before a dental impression is removed from
the mouth. As long as the impression is in the mouth,

the shrinkage is confined to noncritical areas because
the intraoral surfaces restrain the impression material.
After removal, the impression experiences more shrinkage as the polymerization continues. Although these materials are elastic, the elastic recovery is viscoelastic and
requires 20 to 30 minutes to reach a point of accurately
returning to the intraoral dimensions being duplicated.
During this pause for elastic recovery, continued polymerization can distort the impression size and shape. To
minimize these effects, high levels of fillers are incorporated in the matrix. Filler levels vary between 15 and 60
weight percent and are chosen on the basis of compatiblity with the matrix material and expense.
Portions of the impression that must record fine details of the tooth structure are normally impressed with
the least-filled formulations (light-bodied material) so
that there is maximal flow and adaptation to intraoral
structure before curing. However, the bulk of the impression is the highly filled material (heavy bodied material), which minimizes shrinkage contributions and
greatly reduces inaccuracy. Examples of the relative degree of dimensional change versus filler content and
material types are reported in Fig. 4-86.
Polyvinyl siloxane undergoes a chain reaction polymerization (which is also an addition reaction) during
setting that is fast, goes almost to completion, and does
not generate condensation by-products. This characteristic provides a major advantage for these materials compared with other elastic impression materials. Once the
i mpression is removed, it is dimensionally stable, and
the casts that will be fabricated from the impression can
be produced at any time. In the case of the other rubber
elastic impression materials, the impression should be
poured immediately after pausing 20 to 30 minutes for
viscoelastic recovery.
Polyvinyl siloxanes commonly use exotic curing systems based on chloroplatinic acid (a platinum catalyst).
During the reaction, the acid decomposes and generates
small amounts of hydrogen gas as a by-product. Early

CHAPTER4

Dental Materials

FIG . 4-86 Examples of setting shrinkage of polysulfide and polyvinyl siloxane impression materials for light-, regular-, and heavy-bodied consistencies. (Data from Eames et al: J Prosthet Dent
42:159-162, 1979.)

versions of polyvinyl siloxane were plagued by gas bubble formation that ruined casts poured in the impressions
unless 24 to 48 hours were permitted for out-gassing.
However, newer materials contain hydrogen scavengers
that react with, and tie up, the hydrogen by-products.
Another recent modification to many commercial
polyvinyl siloxane impression materials is the addition
of surfactant to increase the hydrophilic nature of the
material. Although this appears to have a favorable effect on the ease with which these new "hydrophilic"
siloxane materials can be poured up with gypsum products, there is no conclusive evidence that these newer
materials wet tooth structure better than unmodified
(no surfactant added) siloxane materials .
Clinical Considerations. The most significant clinical consideration when using an elastic impression material is the rate of removal of the initially set impression.
All polymer-based materials are strain-rate sensitive. If
they are stressed quickly, they behave as though they
are stronger and more elastic than if stressed slowly.
Therefore elastic impression materials should be removed from intraoral surfaces with a relatively rapid
motion. The objective is to minimize the time that the
impression is distorted. This approach prevents conversion of mechanical energy into plastic, rather than
elastic, deformation. Teasing or slowly deforming an impression produces unwanted plastic deformation and
introduces inaccuracies into both the final impression
and resulting cast.
Properties of impression materials not only influence clinical techniques, but also preparation of casts

and dies. Hydrophobic impressions are not wet well
by water-based cast and die materials. Wetting agents
are used to avert air entrapment in detailed areas under these conditions. A final mechanical property of
the impression material dictates ease of cast removal.
The stiffness of impressions (e.g., polyether material)
can cause breakage of thin "teeth" of the cast.
The impression must remain accurate while being
disinfected. Chapter 8 provides information for infection control of the impression and related items.
CAST METAL RESTORATIONS
Creation of a cast metal restoration involves a chain of
procedures from waxing a pattern of the intended final
restoration on a die, investing the pattern to create a
mold space for casting, casting the restoration, finishing
and polishing the casting, and cementing the restoration
intraorally. Because of the complexity of this sequence,
properties desirable for a casting alloy are as much governed by technique limitations as by the final intraoral
service considerations. Each of these is addressed in the
following paragraphs.
Terminology. Cast metal alloys may be used to form the
entire restoration, or may be designed as a substructure
and veneered with porcelain to create a tooth-colored restoration. Those that are veneered with porcelain may be
described generically as porcelain-bonded-to-metal (PBM),
ceramic-bonded-to-metal ( CBM) or porcelain-fused-to-metal
(PFM) restorations. For successful porcelain application,
the metal alloy must have a relatively high melting point
to tolerate the high porcelain firing temperatures with-

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

TABLE 4-18 Objectives for Allying the Components of Gold Casting Alloys

out sagging or melting. The melting temperature of
restorations that are all metal (without porcelain) can be
any temperature that can be conveniently processed.
Classification. Corrosion resistance is an essential characteristic of dental casting alloys. These alloys are categorized in terms of their: (1) mechanism of corrosion resistance and (2) main elements in the composition
affecting the corrosion resistance (see the next section,
Composition, Structure, and Properties of Gold Castings). Corrosion resistance is achieved with either immune or passivating alloy systems. For dentistry, immune systems are divided into gold systems and gold
substitute systems. Passivating systems are divided into
nickel-chromium (Ni-Cr), cobalt-chromium (Co-Cr),
iron-chromium (Fe-Cr), and titanium (Ti) systems.
Many of the terms relating to corrosion resistance
have very special meanings. Noble metal alloys are very
resistant to both corrosion and electrochemical corrosion. These systems are based on gold, platinum, palladium, rhodium, iridium, ruthenium, and/or osmium.
Precious metal alloys contain metals of high economic
value and, as a group, traditionally include all of the
noble metals and silver. Low-gold alloys contain only 3 to
50 weight percent gold or other noble metal elements. If
less than half (75 weight percent) of the atoms in a gold
alloy are corrosion-resistant (gold [Au], platinum [Pt],
or palladium [Pd]), the overall corrosion resistance decreases dramatically. Low-gold alloys are attempts at
producing lower cost alloys that still retain some of the
qualities of premium-priced gold-based alloys. However, the actual quantity of gold may be deceptively low.
Gold substitute alloys are precious metal alloys that do
not contain gold. The best examples are Ag-Pd systems
and other Pd alloys.
Base metal alloys are based on active metallic elements
that corrode but develop corrosion resistance via surface oxidation that produces a thin, tightly adherent
film that inhibits further corrosion. Alloys are formulated with 18% to 28% by weight Cr that produces films
of Cr2O3 that passivate the surface. The films are brittle
and may be ruptured, but reform immediately if suffi-

cient Cr remains locally in the composition. Oxidation
of other elements, such as Ni and Co, also produce superficial oxides, but Cr2O3 is principally responsible for
the corrosion resistance. Ti (and Ti-6A1-4V) alloy is
widely used in dentistry for implant systems, because it
passivates by forming TiO z, is biocompatible, and permits osseointegration with bone.
Composition, Structure, and Properties of Gold
Castings. Cast restorations are constructed traditionally
from gold alloys because of their potentially excellent
corrosion resistance. In the nineteenth century, gold
coins had been used as the source of alloy for casting
restorations. Standardization of casting materials occurred in the 1930s. Dental gold casting alloys were defined in terms of their relative noble metal concentration,
physical properties (fusion temperature), and mechanical properties (hardness, elongation, and yield point).
The original ADA classification system defined Types A, B,
and C gold alloys. This specification was then revised
and extended to include four types (1, 11, III, IV) of alloys.
Types 1, 11, and III corresponded to the original Types A,
B, and C, while Type IV included higher strength alloys .
These four alloy types contain approximately 83%, 78%,
78%, and 75% noble metal elements, respectively, of which
gold is the principal one. Types I and 11 alloys are not capable of being heat treated, while Types III and IV alloys
are. Type I compositions are intended for small inlays
that do not involve significant occlusal loads. Type II alloys are for inlays and onlays. Type III alloys are for onlays and crowns. Type IV alloys are for crowns, bridges,
and removable partial dentures.
The major elemental components of gold casting alloys are listed in Table 4-18 for several commercial products. Gold is primarily responsible for producing corrosion resistance, but it also is relatively soft and requires
other alloying element additions to solution-harden the
composition. Copper is the primary alloying element that
increases the hardness of the material. However, copper
also tends to make the color less yellow and more orange. Silver is added to offset the color contributions of
copper. Palladium is added to increase the hardness of

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

the alloy and has a strong whitening effect. Both palladium and platinum tend to raise the melting range for
the alloy. Finally, zinc is added as a processing aid to
scavenge oxygen at the surface of a melt and prevent
oxidation and loss of other key elements during the
casting procedure.
In recent years, the relatively high cost of gold has
prompted increased use of low-gold, gold substitute, and
base metal alloys for dental castings . 97 Cast partial dentures
are almost exclusively made of base metal alloy. Many
full crowns and fixed bridges are made of palladiumbased gold substitute alloys, but the mechanical properties
of these materials make them difficult to fabricate into inlays and onlays. However, gradual improvement in the
materials has made the low-gold alloys acceptable for selective use for these applications. A number of products
containing approximately 50 weight percent of gold are available that exhibit acceptable tarnish resistance and adequate
properties if extensive marginal burnishing is not required.

Key properties for casting alloys are reported in Table
4-19. A low melting range is desirable for simplified
heating and casting procedures. Moderately high density is advantageous, because most dental alloys are nor-

mally cast by centrifugal force casting machines. High
density helps force the alloy quickly into the intricate details of the pattern within the casting mold before cooling solidifies the material. Gold-based alloys are much
better in this regard than most other alloys. Finally, a low
coefficient of thermal expansion helps reduce the shrinkage that occurs from the solidus temperature down to
room temperature. Because cooling produces shrinkage,
there must be some expansion somewhere else in the technique sequence to compensate for dimensional changes
upon cooling. Alloys with low coefficients of thermal
contraction and that possess low melting temperatures
can be controlled more easily.
Certainly the primary chemical property of concern is
corrosion resistance. To achieve this quality it is desirable that the entire alloy be a single-phase composition.
Two-phase compositions are prone to local galvanic
(structure-selective) corrosion. Types I, II, and III compositions are single-phase alloys. Type IV compositions
may include two phases. There is a mechanical advantage with a second phase because of a hardening effect,
but that benefit must be weighed against the loss of
some corrosion resistance. Contamination or improper

TABLE 4-19 Properties of Typical Gold Casting Alloys*

*Relative properties are shown in brackets.
ADA, American Dental Association; BHN, Brinell hardness number;

LCTE,

linear coefficient of thermal expansion.

CHAPTER 4

casting of gold-based alloys can produce unwanted
phases that compromise both the mechanical properties
and the corrosion resistance.
The primary mechanical properties of interest for the final
cast restoration are a high modulus of elasticity (stiffness) and
a high elastic limit (hardness) to resist deformation in service.
However, high values are not necessarily desirable properties during the fabrication of the restoration. Laboratory procedures such as finishing, polishing, and burnishing are more complicated if the restoration has a
high resistance to plastic deformation (high hardness).
During these processes, it is important for the casting
metal near the margins to be adapted closely to the die
(but without damaging the die), by minimal mechanical
deformation (burnishing). Marginal gaps that exceed
0.1 mm should not be burnished. Rather the casting
should be remade. Alloys with a high percentage elongation and a low yield point (low hardness) facilitate burnishing. After these procedures are complete, it is desirable to increase the overall hardness to high levels for
clinical service. This goal can be accomplished with Types
III and IV ADA gold alloys, which are heat-treatable.
The heat treatment produces disorder-order and/or
spinodal hardening processes.
Cast alloys should not produce toxic reaction products
or release toxic elements from their surfaces. Immune
and passive alloys appear to have excellent biologic
properties. However, some casting alloys are active and
generate soluble corrosion products. Although the restorations look unchanged, toxic soluble products can be
released.
Clinical Considerations. The three principal clinical
considerations for long-term success of cast restorations
are close fit, corrosion resistance, and retention. Sturdevant
and others 237 and Morris have shown that gold-based
alloys demonstrate excellent corrosion resistance for at
least 10 years. If the cemented restorations have a close fit
( within 20 um) and the tooth preparations are adequately
designed, then the conventional dental cements resist degradation and provide excellent retention and service for 20 to
40 years.
Retention and service life of cast restorations are produced by a combination of factors, such as the taper of
the tooth preparation, stress distribution design of the
tooth preparation to protect remaining tooth structure
against fracture (see Chapter 20), the cement type, surface roughness on the internal aspects of the restoration,
and potential micromechanical or chemical bonding of
cement with the restoration and tooth structure. Under
most circumstances the restoration surface for goldbased alloys is not well suited to cement adhesion. The
gold alloy surfaces are not wet well with cements and
do not have the potential to be chemically bonded by
existing formulations. However, if the internal surfaces
are sandblasted, then sufficient micromechanical irregularities are produced to permit excellent luting. Tin or other

Dental Materials

metal plating also can be used as a surface modification
that is chemically reactive toward some cements.
In some cases, such as Maryland bridges, the retention of the casting is dependent on well-developed micromechanical spaces along the bonded surfaces of
enamel and the casting. The retentive surface of the casting is accomplished by choosing a two-phase dental
casting alloy. The metal surface to be bonded is then relieved by chemical or electrolytic etching of one phase
in preference to the other. The relieved surface is micromechanically interlocked with composite cement onto
etched tooth structure.
DENTAL CEMENTS
Traditional dental cements are based on reactions between
acidic liquids and basic powders to produce reaction
product salts that form a solid matrix surrounding residual powder particles (Fig. 4-87). Microscopically, these
cements are classic examples of filler and matrix microstructures. Newer cements are formulated as modified versions of materials originally developed as composite restorative materials. In all cements, the properties
of interest are governed by the extent to which the matrix
is minimized in the final material.
Terminology and Classification. Traditional dental
cements are listed in Table 4-20, along with identification of the major powder and liquid components and
the reaction products. ZOE, reinforced ZOE, ZOE-EBA,
silicate, and zinc silicophosphate cements are no longer routinely used to permanently cement restorations. Zinc
phosphate cement has been extensively replaced by polycarboxylate or glass-ionomer cements.,49 The latter two are
based on ion-cross-linked polyacrylic acid matrices that

Powder reinforces set cement matrix

FIG 4-87 Schematic representation of all dental cement components and microstructures. An acid-functional liquid is mixed
with a basic powder. Reaction of the periphery of the powder
consumes the acid groups of the liquid, producing a reaction
product matrix that surrounds residual powder particles. The
microstructure is a classic composite-like one with residual
powder particles reinforcing the weaker matrix. (Courtesy
Stephen C. Bayne SC, School of Dentistry, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.)

CHAPTER

T R B L E 4-20

4

Dental Materials

Summary of Dental Cement Classifications, Abbreviations, Reactants, and Reaction Products

*Relative properties are shown in brackets.
ADA, American Dental Association; BHN, Brinell hardness number; EBA, ethoxybenzoic acid; LCTE, linear coefficient of thermal expansion; PAA,
polyacrylic acid.

have the potential to react chemically with residual
powder particles and surface tooth structure.
Zinc phosphate cement was originally developed more
than 100 years ago, and was extremely popular during
most of the twentieth century. For that reason it is often
referred to as the "gold standard" for all dental cements,
despite the fact that its laboratory properties are generally inferior to those of most other currently used cements. The powder component is 90% zinc oxide powder
with 10% magnesium oxide added. The liquid is 50%
phosphoric acid in water, and is buffered with aluminum
and zinc salts to control the pH. Components are mixed
typically 2:1 (powder-to-liquid by weight) on a chilled
glass slab using controlled additions of powder to the liquid. These precautions are necessary to reduce reaction
speed, alter the pH in a controlled manner, dissipate heat
from the exothermic reaction, and provide sufficient
working time. During setting, phosphoric acid ions react
with zinc ions to produce a successive series of hydrated
zinc phosphate salts. Ultimately, tertiary zinc phosphate
crystals are produced that form a matrix around residual
zinc oxide particles. Of all the contemporary dental cements, zinc phosphate is the only one with a crystalline

reaction product matrix. Intercrystalline spaces within
the matrix more readily allow diffusion or leakage of
small molecules than other cement systems. Zinc phosphate also tends to be more brittle than other cements
that have amorphous matrices instead.
Polycarboxylate cement was developed in the 1960s by
Dennis Smith in an effort to circumvent potential pulpal
problems associated with the low pH of traditional cements (e.g., zinc phosphate cement) and biocompatibility problems related to the mobility of small acidic ions.
By choosing an acid-functional polymer as a substitute
for phosphoric acid in forming the matrix, it also was
possible to produce cements that could adhere via
chelation to dental surfaces. The original acid-functional
polymer was polyacrylic acid. However, current commercial products include two or more monomers in the
polymer; thus it is technically more correct to refer to the
final polymer as a polyalkenoate. Cements based on solutions of these polymers (i.e., polycarboxylate or glassionomer cements) may be called polyalkenoic cements.
Glass-ionomer cements are hybrids of silicate and polycarboxylate cements designed to combine the optical and
fluoride-releasing properties of silicate particles with

CHAPTER 4

TABLE 4-21

Dental Materials

Characteristic Properties of Categories of Luting Dental Cements*

*Relative values are shown in brackets. These values are representative of a wide range of possible values. ADA, American Dental Association;
LCTE, linear coefficient of thermal expansion; P/L, powder-to-liquid ratio. (See Table 4-20 for abbreviations for cement.)

the chemically adhesive, and more biocompatible, characteristics of the polyacrylic acid matrix compared with
the extremely acidic matrix of silicate cement.
Composite cements (or resin cements or composite resin
cements) have the same general components as composite restorative materials (see Composites earlier in
this chapter), but generally have lower concentrations
of filler particles. These materials are reserved almost
exclusively for use with all ceramic restorations and are
discussed later (see Milled Ceramics), although they are
suitable for use with all indirect restorative materials.
These materials have the best laboratory properties of
all cements, but require more complicated clinical procedures and generally include bonding systems for
dentin, enamel, and the restoration.
Although dental cements are most often used for luting indirect restorations, they also may be used as bases.
As luting agents, the most important clinical requirements are
flow, wetting, and film thickness. To enhance flow, the materials are mixed at relatively low powder-to-liquid ratios. To guarantee that a film thickness of less than 25 Rm
can be produced, cement particles of 5 Um or less in diameter should be used. The actual film thickness that
is achieved ranges from 20 to 100 Um and depends on
(1) the viscosity of the mixture and (2) the availability of
space for displacement of the cement (as discussed in the
next section). Although low powder-to-liquid ratios produce low viscosities for luting agents, cements used for
bases should be mechanically stronger and are mixed
with the maximum powder content manageable.
Composition, Structure, and Properties. Final properties of dental cements depend on the powder-to-liquid

ratios used during mixing. Higher powder-to-liquid ratios not only increase the mechanical strength, but also
increase the viscosity and reduce wetting and flow. The
final matrices of the set cement are indicated in Table
4-20. Details of the cementing procedures are presented
in Chapters 14, 15, and 20. A brief summary of dental cement properties is provided in Table 4-21.
Cements are routinely evaluated for their solubility
and disintegration in laboratory tests. Unfortunately, no
laboratory tests or pseudoclinical tests of cements have
ever been correlated with clinical performance categories, such as retention. At the same time, only limited
long-term clinical trials of cements have ever been reported. A unique clinical research study was performed
in the 1970s at the University of Michigan, by Silvey and
t o compare zinc phosphate, reinforced ZOE,
Myers
and polycarboxylate cements for retention of crowns
and bridges over 7 years. There was practically no difference in failure rates (ZP = 2%, ZOE-EBA = 8%, PC =
5%) and no differences were statistically significant.
Mechanisms of failure for these materials are not well
understood. Because most cements are brittle, it is presumed that fatigue loading produces cracks at internal
defects, propagates the cracks into a network, and causes
cement loss or microleakage at the margins, which is accompanied by sensitivity or secondary caries. Cemented
crowns and bridges transfer most stresses from occlusal
loading laterally, through the restoration and onto the
margins, rather than directly onto the underlying coronal structure. Cement at the margins is in the most critical region. The greatest portion of cement is involved
in retention. Although cements most likely undergo

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

long-term changes in composition and properties, loss of
retention is generally much less of a problem, than problems at margins.
Clinical Considerations. Zinc phosphate cements
have the potential during setting to release components
from the acid-rich matrix into dentin and irritate the
pulp. Therefore, when using zinc phosphate cement,
dentin is routinely protected with varnish or dentin
sealer. However, other cements that can chemically bond
to dentin must be allowed to come into direct contact
with that surface. Thus, varnishes or sealers should not be
used to coat dentin if a polycarboxylate or conventional glass
ionomer cement is to be used for chemical adhesion. When
bonding composite or ceramic restorations, the dentin
should not be varnished or sealed, but, instead, the entire
preparation should be treated with the bonding system
used (see Chapters 11 to 15).
Cement displacement is a key factor for successfully cementing restorations. The process is a hydraulic (liquid in
motion) one, dependent on rapid flow and escape of excess cement between the restoration and tooth preparation during cementation. The seating of the restoration
must be completed within a few seconds while the cement is sufficiently fluid. One way to increase the potential of maximum seating is to make channels large enough
(larger if they are longer) to permit rapid escape of cement that otherwise would be entrapped. For metal cast-

ings, the channels could be created internally in the wax
pattern or cut in the casting, extending gingivally from
the occlusal (pulpal wall) aspect of the preparation (casting) to a point approximately 0.5 mm short of the restoration margins. Inlay and onlay preparations have short
enough external walls so that the castings do not usually require
escape channels (see Chapter 20), but crowns may require
them if considerable axial length is present. Channels
allow seating with 330 N load (75 lb), the recognized
possible masticatory pressure achievable in the molar
region (see Cementation in Chapter 20). To further produce cement flow, loading (forces placed on the restoration being seated) must be applied rapidly, at sufficiently
high levels, and steadily maintained until the cement has
initially set. The final result ideally is a restoration so
well-seated that its preparation-side surface is in intimate
contact with the tooth preparation, particularly along the
margins, resulting in a cement film thickness no greater
than 25 um.
MACHINED RESTORATIONS
Until 1988, indirect ceramic dental restorations were
fabricated exclusively by casting and/or sintering techniques. Neither technique is capable of consistently
producing pore-free restorations. Cooling shrinkage
distortions and residual stresses can initiate fractures at
residual pores in ceramics. However, pore-free restora-

TABLE 4-22 Examples of CAD/CAM and Copy Milling Systems in Dentistry (Circa 1999)

Adapted from Hickel R et al: Inter Dent J 47:247-258, 1997; Preston JD, Duret F: Oral Health 87:17-27, 1997; and Willer J, Rossbach A, Weber H:
J Prosthet Dent 80:346-353, 1998. CAD, Computer-aided design; CAM, computer-assisted manufacturing.

CHAPTER 4

tions can be produced by machining blocks of commercially fabricated pore-free ceramic or composite.
Terminology and Classification. The two principal
machining approaches for dental restorations are: (1) copy
milling and (2) CAD/CAM milling. Examples of commercial systems are indicated in Table 4-22.
Copy milling uses a replica (e.g., wax, plastic, stone, or
metal) of the desired form as a guide for a milling machine. The surface of the replica is traced by turning the
pattern and touching the patterns surface with a finger
stylus. The positions of the pattern and stylus are used
to adjust the positions of a block of machinable material
and a milling tool cutting the block, respectively. This
procedure is represented schematically in Fig. 4-88.
A wide variety of material types can be used in conj unction with copy milling systems, including materials
difficult to process using other methods. For example,
titanium, which has a very high melting temperature, is
difficult to cast. However, it can be copy milled easily
and inexpensively. Composite and ceramic materials are
being used for copy milling. The choice of material depends in large part, on the type of margin required for
the restoration. Virtually any geometry and size can be
copy milled as long as there is direct access of the finger
guide and cutting tool to the surfaces involved.
CAD/CAM milling uses digital information about the
tooth preparation (computerized surface digitization
[ CSD]), or a pattern of the restoration to provide a computer-aided design (CAD) on the video monitor for inspection and modification. The image is the reference
for designing a restoration on the video monitor. Once
the three-dimensional image for the restoration design is
accepted, the computer translates the image into a set of

Dental Materials

instructions to guide a milling tool (computer-assisted
manufacturing [CAM]) in cutting the restoration from a
block of material (Fig. 4-89).
Stages of Fabrication. A number of approaches to
CAD/CAM for restorative dentistry have evolved, but
all systems ideally involve five basic stages: (1) computerized surface digitization, (2) computer-aided design,
(3) computer-assisted manufacturing, (4) computer-aided
The last
esthetics, and (5) computer-aided finishing.
two stages are very difficult and have not yet been included in commercial systems. Various computerized
surface digitization techniques have been explored. Examples of different approaches are listed in Box 4-3.
Laser (optical) techniques and contact digitization are
the most promising approaches from the point of view
of cost and accuracy.
The Ceramic Reconstruction System ( CEREC) (Siemens,
Germany) was the first commercially available CAD/
CAM system used in dentistry. An intraoral video camera images the tooth preparation and the adjacent tooth
surfaces. Elevations of the imaged surfaces are calculated by Moire fringe displacement. Features of the tooth
preparation are used to define the limits of the restoration. External surfaces of the restoration are estimated
as distances to adjacent tooth structure in the computer
view. Occlusal surfaces are more highly refined later by
the operator intraorally after cementing the CEREC restoration. Other CAD/CAM systems have become available during the 1990s, including improved versions of
the CEREC System (see Table 4-22). 106,1911,161
Composition, Structure, and Properties of Machined Materials. Restorations can be machined from
metals, ceramics, or composites. Ceramics are generally

FIG . 4-88 Schematic representation of copy milling.

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

FIG 4-89 Schematic summary of CAD/CAM and copy milling operations.

Computerized Surface Digitatization
Techniques
1. Photogrammetry
2. Moire
3. Laser scanning
4. CT scanning
5. MRI
6. Ultrasound
7. Contact profilometry
CT, Computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.

preferred because of their superior esthetics and biocompatibility. The machinable ceramics used are generally either some form of modified feldspathic porcelain or
special fluoro-alumino-silicate glass-ceramics with excellent
fracture and wear resistance. In addition, partially sintered
high strength ceramic compositions of alumina, spinel,
and zirconia can be machined for use as copings. The
porcelain and glass-ceramic materials being machined
are pore free and generally have both crystalline and noncrystalline phases. A two-phase composition permits
differential etching of internal restoration walls for mi-

cromechanical retention using bonding agents and/or
luting cements. Table 4-23 summarizes the typical properties of machinable ceramic materials in clinical use . 22° ,
Fig. 4-90 shows an example of the phases, revealed
by etching for bonding of a machinable glass-ceramic
material.
Bonding of ceramic CAD/CAM restoration is a critical step in achieving good long-term results. Ceramic
restorations are bonded to tooth structure by: (1) etching
enamel to increase the bondable surface area; (2) etching, priming, and applying the bonding agent to dentin
(when appropriate); (3) etching (by HF acid) and then
priming (silanating) the restoration; and (4) cementing
the restoration with composite cement. This situation is
schematically summarized in Fig. 4-91.
CAD/CAM systems for fabricating restorations are
not currently designed to produce esthetics comparable
to the characterization possible in a dental laboratory.
Most CAD/CAM systems use uniform color (monolithic) materials for the entire restoration. Despite the fact
that increased shades of ceramic are becoming available
for use with CAD/CAM and copy milling systems, the
final esthetics depend on a combination of color match

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

FIG.4-90

Ammonium bifluoride acid-etched machinable glass ceramic inlay (Dicor IVIGC,
Dentsply International, York, Pennsylvania) in preparation for cementation. Approximately 65%
of glass ceramic is fluoromica crystals embedded in an amorphous matrix. The matrix at its surface is partially dissolved by etching. A, Etching partially reveals crystals that are 1 to 5 Um i n
size. B, Higher magnification view of fluoromica crystals that provide micromechanical interl ocking for bonding. (Courtesy Stephen C. Bayne, School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.)

Mechanical Properties of Machinable Ceramic Materials in Clinical Use with CAD/CAM and
Copy Milling Systems (Circa 1999)

Adapted from Grossman DG: Proceedings of the International Symposium on Computer Restorations, Chicago, 1991, Quintessence; Seghi RR, Denri IL,
Rosenstiel SF: J Prosthet Dent 74:145-150, 1995; Seghi RR, Sorensen JA: Int J Prosthodont 8:239-246, 1995; and Thompson JY Bayne SC, Heymann
HO: JProsthet Dent 76:619-623, 1996.
CAD, Computer-aided design; CAM, computer assisted manufacturing.

to adjacent tooth structure and light scattering from adjacent tooth structure into the restoration. Small restorations display color governed more by scattered light and
are very esthetic. Larger restorations appear to be duller
and less esthetic. Although this latter occurrence cannot
be totally remedied, some color variation can be introduced by cutting troughs into the internal (tooth side)
surface of CAD/CAM restorations. The troughs are then
filled with varying shades of composite. This technique
produces an optical effect of different dentin colors and
enhances the overall esthetic appearance.

Composition, Structure, and Properties of Composite Cements. Although the dimensional accuracy
and fit of machined restorations continues to improve, a
weak link with CAD/CAM and copy milling systems is
the cement gap along occlusal surfaces that may be wider
than desired. Normal food abrasion produces cement
loss and ditching. Wear of this type permits stain accumulation in marginal gaps and leaves exposed enamel
and ceramic margins. Minimizing this gap depends on
the computer digitization, design, and manufacturing
steps being sufficiently accurate.

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

Acronyms for National and
International Groups Interested in
Dental Standards
NDA
ADA
CDMIE
CDT
ANSI
ASC MD156
FDA
ASTM
FDI
I SO
I SO TC106

National Dental Association
American Dental Association
Council on Dental Materials,
I nstruments, and Equipment
Council on Dental Therapeutics
American National Standards
I nstitute
Accredited Standards Committee,
Medical Devices
Food and Drug Administration
American Society for Testing and
Materials
Federation Dentaire Internationale
I nternational Organizations for
Standards
I SO Technical Committee

SAFETY AND EFFICACY
FIG 4-91 Schematic summary of attaching ceramic CAD/CAM
i nlays to tooth structure. Enamel is etched for retention of
bonding agents. Inlays are etched (with HF acid) and primed
(silanated). The restoration is cemented with composite cement.

CAD/CAM restorations are routinely cemented with
moderately filled composites (homogeneous microfills or
hybrids). The composite cements are not as mechanically
strong as composite restorative materials but do provide
the best abrasion resistance because of the microprotection effect of closely spaced filler particles. Zinc phosphate and glass-ionomer cements are not recommended
for use with milled ceramic restorations . 243
Clinical Considerations. The clinical longevity of
these restorations is difficult to project, because only relatively short-term clinical research information is available. 102,104,111,161 However, review of the earliest restorations of this type indicates that, although cement
margins may degrade, the restorations themselves survive equally as well as amalgam or composite restorations of the same type. There is no evidence of postoperative sensitivity or secondary caries.
Major advantages of milled ceramics are excellent flexural
strength and the ability to rigidly bond remaining tooth
structure together. Occasional restoration fractures have

been reported, but in most cases they are associated
with restoration designs that are too thin and subject to
stress concentration during flexure or fatigue fracture. It
is still important to use adequate thickness in the restoration
design to resist flexure.

Additionally, restorations from these systems are repairable because they are etchable, and defects can be restored using bonded composites. There should be no
reason to completely replace the restoration unless it
has undergone bulk fracture.

The availability of dental materials of high quality and
dependability is due in large part to the existence of
standards for the safety and efficacy of such products.
Yet, very few clinicians are aware of, or understand, the
intricate system of voluntary and mandatory controls
currently in place to accomplish this purpose.
STANDARDS PROGRAMS
The large number of organizations involved in standards programs and their acronyms are summarized in
Box 4-4.
Standards programs can be broadly divided into dental professional organizations, larger interest groups that
include all professional organizations, and government
agencies. These hierarchies exist both within the United
States and throughout the world as a whole. Fig. 4-92 attempts to interrelate these groups. In the discussion that
follows, individual group activities are addressed. Most
professional organizations attempt to coordinate their
standards with other organizations so that a rational
system of tests is involved in evaluating similar events.
Professional organizations develop voluntary standards
that are often the basis for governmental regulatory standards whenever governments become involved. In many
cases, the good faith standards and self-regulation of industry obviates the need for government involvement.
American Dental Association. For about 130 years,
the ADA has been a reliable source of information on
the safety and effectiveness of dental products. The ADA
Seal of Acceptance program is designed to assist dental
professionals and the public in making informed decisions about dental materials, instruments, equipment,
and therapeutics.
The ADA's Council on Scientific Affairs (CSA) evaluates
submitted products three times a year at its meetings.

CHAPTER 4

FIG .4-92 Summary of key standards (voluntary) and regulations (mandatory). Dental professional standards communicate with standards organizations via liason groups (ADA with
ANSI via ASC MD156; FDI with ISO via ISO/TC 106). A few
countries have regulatory groups.
While following the Provisions for Acceptance, companies
are encouraged to submit information on their products
for review by the CSA. In many cases, the submission
must also comply with product category guidelines
and/or American National Standards Institute (ANSI)/
ADA specifications. Criteria for acceptance of many products include data from clinical studies and/or ADA laboratory testing. For example, posterior composite and
dentin bonding materials require submission of the results of two clinical studies that successfully meet the
guidelines for the respective category. Dental amalgam
and impression materials are examples of products that
require company laboratory data and in-house testing by
ADA laboratories. The CSA utilizes over 60 ANSI/ADA
specifications and has developed over 50 product category guidelines to use to evaluate a submission.
Depending on the category, a product is Accepted for
a period of 3 to 5 years, whereupon the product is then
considered for reacceptance. Accepted products may
use the ADA Seal (Fig. 4-93) in all advertising and promotional materials after demonstrating compliance
with ADA advertising guidelines for claims of safety
and efficacy.
American National Standards Institute. The ANSI
is a clearinghouse for national standards. The Accredited Standards Committee (ASC) MD156 is a liaison
group between the ADA and ANSI. It is an independent
committee of both organizations sponsored by the ADA
and accredited by ANSI for dentistry in the United
States. ADA standards that are developed are submitted
to ANSI for approval as national standards.
Food and Drug Administration. Since 1976, the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) has been charged with

Dental Materials

FIG . 4-93 ADA Seal of Acceptance. (Courtesy American Dental
Association Council on Scientific Affairs, 211 East Avenue,
Chicago, l/Q

regulating dental devices (including materials). In this
role, they classify individual materials as Classes I, II, or
111. Class I materials are simply required to be produced
under conditions of good manufacturing practices to assure reproducibility and continuing safety. Class 11 materials are required to present evidence of meeting standards as well, such as the ADA standards for acceptance
or certification. Class III materials are required, in addition, to submit evidence of safety and efficacy using biocompatibility and clinical data to show satisfactory performance in tissue culture tests, implantation tests, and/
or usage tests. Tests for the relative safety of dental materials (biocompatibility) are described as part of ANSI/
ADA document No. 41. These tests are in large part controversial because they are continually evolving and
may be reinterpreted in light of new or more sophisticated understandings of biocompatibility.
American Society for Testing and Materials. The
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) is a
nongovernmental group involved widely in the development of standards for test methods for use in industry. It has recently become interested in standards for
dentistry (dental materials and devices) as well as the
development of appropriate terminology, nomenclature, and test methods. ASTM's F-4 subcommittee has
developed specifications for surgical implants. ASTM's
F-8 subcommittee governs sports devices such as mouth
guards. ASTM's D-2 committee is concerned with rubber products, such as rubber gloves.
Federation Dentaire Internationale. The worldwide
voluntary federation of national dental organizations is
known as the Federation Dentaire Internationale (FDI).
I nternational Standards Organization. An International Standards Organization (ISO) or International

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

Organization for Standards exists for the purpose of developing international standards for all activities, not
only dentistry. ISO is a nontreaty organization. ANSI is
the United States member of ISO.
FDI maintains a permanent liaison with ISO through
its ISO/TC106-Dentistry group. To the extent that each
group coordinates its activities with each other, the
ADA role has been a major one in initiating standards
for a range of current standards organizations.

SAFETY FOR DENTAL PROFESSIONALS
Although numerous organizations and standards regulate the safety of dental materials with regard to the patient, quite different ones are concerned with the health
of dental professionals. In many situations the scope
and regulations of different groups are overlapping and
inconsistent.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration.

The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
is the U.S. federal agency charged with responsibility for
maintaining safety in the workplace. It differs from the organizations discussed previously, in that OSHA has the
legal authority to enforce compliance. During 1970, the
United States adopted a wide range of OSHA regulations, with the goal of reducing the potential for illness
or injury to employees from chemical exposures. Many
of these regulations were enforced only sparingly during the 1980s, and usually only for large businesses.
Since 1992, enforcement of these standards for dental offices
and dental laboratories has been stricter. OSHA has issued
regulations involving a wide range of issues, including
hazard communications, bloodborne pathogens, office
water lines, and waste disposal.
Hazard communications include public posting of OSHA
regulations, office record keeping, office emergency
planning, office employee training, and office planning
for workman's compensation. These processes involve
seven categories of responsibilities described in the following paragraphs. The ADA provides dental professionals
with detailed information in this regard.
First Category of Responsibility. To ensure that all
employees are aware of the processes required to guarantee the safety and health of the employees, an OSHA
poster must be continuously displayed within the office (at
one or more sites) so as to be seen by all personnel. This location is most often a kitchen, apparel changing location, or employee lounge area. The poster is titled job
Health and Safety Protection.
Second Category of Responsibility. For many years,
large businesses and laboratories have had to meet
OSHA requirements involving hazardous chemicals to
protect the health of their employees. The enforcement
of these requirements has been extended recently to
cover dental offices. Although modifications of office
routines are required, dentistry can benefit from the
prior experience of industry in refining the application of

these safety principles. Hazardous chemical materials are
routinely managed by proper labeling and storage as well as by
certifying that all office personnel are fully informed of possible risks and the necessary precautions in those regards. The
requirement for hazardous chemical labeling is waived
for FDA-regulated items, such as most products in dental offices. However, the information about the nature of
the chemical hazard and its management is still a responsibility of the office. This information is published
on material safety data sheets ( MSDSs) and is available
from individual manufacturers. Manufacturers have the
primary responsibility to determine whether an MSDS is
required and to supply that information. Commercial
chemicals generally are packaged with MSDSs. However, dental products often cannot conveniently include
the MSDS, because the sheet is too big for the package in
which materials are sold. Only some dental products include MSDSs, and therefore, absent MSDS information
must be collected after the fact. The ADA maintains a list
of available MSDSs by company (and code). Therefore it
is relatively easy to check off required MSDSs. Some
manufacturers have not supplied this information to the
ADA and will not be listed. In that case, it is the responsibility of the dental office to contact the manufacturer directly and obtain the MSDSs if they are available. MSDS
information is now available on the Internet both on manufacturer and OSHA home pages. However, permanent
copies of MSDSs are still required within dental offices.
Most personnel in a dental office are not familiar with
key information they need about materials to be able to
make an informed judgment about relative risks or hazards. Therefore the best approach is to inventory everything
in the office (by company or supplier) and then check a
published list for the presence or absence of an MSDS.
These sheets must be available for review by all potentially
exposed office personnel and should be stored in a central location with bold labeling or identification of the site. Most
sheets are three-hole punched for convenient insertion
into an MSDS notebook. A common recommendation is
to label the notebook "MSDS" on the spine and on the
front. The notebook should be of a color that is distinct from
any other notebooks or books that might be in the same
area. All MSDSs should be organized within the notebook in
a logical fashion for locating easily.
MSDSs are typically a two- to four-page summary of
the material's names, chemical reactivity, potential risks
in storage or biologic contact, methods of managing
emergencies, and summaries of key biologic information. A sample MSDS is shown in Fig. 4-94, with categoric sections indicated.
Third Category of Responsibility. The information,
once collected, must be communicated to all employees on a
regular basis. In the same notebook with the MSDSs, records
should be kept on procedures and times for annual employee
hazard communications training. This record should include information about nonroutine tasks such as clean-

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

f I G 4-94 Example of a IVISDS for a dentin bonding agent, containing information on the mate-

rial's: (1) ingredients and identity, (2) physical (and chemical) characteristics, (3) fire and explosion hazard data, (4) reactivity data, (5) environmental precautions, (6) suggested first aid,
( 7) precautions for safe handling and use, and (8) health hazard data.

ing the dental unit suction reservoirs, training new employees, training service personnel for the office (e.g.,
janitorial personnel), and inventorying new materials,
equipment, or devices that might require updating the
MSDSs. This process is rigorously defined and the appropriate details can be obtained from OSHA and the
ADA. Some of the details are emphasized in the following discussions.
Fourth Category of Responsibility. For safety in the
general office environment and during servicing, sterilization, and maintenance of equipment and instruments,
it is mandatory that precautionary measures (e.g., ventilation), personal protective equipment (e.g., protective
gloves, apron, and goggles), and emergency equipment
(e.g., eyewash fountain, fire extinguisher, and resuscita-

tor mask) be available and appropriately used. These
precautions should be reviewed at least annually. Review of
the emergency equipment should be checked at least monthly.
A complete review of emergency preparedness for a
small office for health and safety can generally be conducted in a matter of 10 to 15 minutes. This review requires only a small amount of time and minimizes employee and patient risks.
Fifth Category of Responsibility. Any incidents that
require medical attention or involve loss of work should
be documented. A range of forms is needed to: (1) maintain permanent records of incidents, follow-ups, and new
preventive measures, (2) summarize incidents and dates
for periodic review, and (3) file workman's compensation reports.

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

Sixth Category of Responsibility. In addition to

OSHA's initial concern with hazard communications,
relatively recent emphases have been placed on universal
precautions against exposure to bloodborne pathogens and
waste disposal for dental offices. Infection control practices
for blood-borne pathogens have become much more
sophisticated because of concern about the increase in
hepatitis and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
transmissions. These problems and related procedures
for offices are discussed in detail in Chapter 8.
Waste disposal currently is not regulated by OSHA. It
really involves collection, transport, and management
operations. Within the dental office, the collection systems must necessarily be more sophisticated than in
many businesses because of infection control regulations.
Trash must be separated on the basis of being: (1) biohazard
waste (hazardous), (2) chemical waste (hazardous), or (3) regular (nonhazardous) waste. Nonhazardous waste can be
placed in sanitary landfills. The other materials must be incinerated or buried in continuously managed waste disposal sites.

Currently, most communities have focused only on
medical waste. Containers, such as dentin bonding agent
vials or precapsulated amalgam capsules, although considered chemical waste, can be disposed of in the nonhazardous waste. Waste transport may occur within a
building and/or from the building to an approved disposal facility or site. The owner of the office generating the
waste is responsible for guaranteeing appropriate and safe
transport for disposal. However, there are numerous care-

less or unscrupulous transporters and managers of
waste disposal, who are inadequately informed or unconvinced about the care needed. There is some responsibility for the dental office personnel to ensure the reliability of individuals providing these services.
Seventh Category of Responsibility. Finally there
must be employee training and education programs at least
annually with respect to hazards, management of blood-borne
pathogens, and waste disposal. All new employees must be
trained immediately. Records must be kept of the training
procedures and training times. All individual records should
be kept either in the MSDS notebook and/or in personnel
records.

Environmental Protection Agency. All by-products
of dental procedures end up as solid, liquid, or gaseous
waste, and their disposal can be regulated by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). At the present time,
most waste disposal is regulated by local authorities.
Hazardous gases or vapors, such as nitrous oxide,
should be vented directly to the outside air or should be
collected from the air using scrubbing devices, both to
protect intraoffice individuals and to prevent inadvertent contamination of other local air systems.
Liquid wastes emptied into the sewer or drainage systems have some potential to contaminate the waste
treatment plant or groundwater supplies. Therefore it is
becoming increasingly important to separate hazardous

liquids, such as waste solvents, for controlled disposal.
Small amounts of water-based chemicals can be diluted
and flushed into the sewer system. However, wateri mmiscible materials are best disposed of in alternative
ways. Waste disposal of blood and body fluids into sanitary sewers is a commonly accepted practice.
Solid wastes include the trash from an office and the
effluent disposed into the sewer system. Collected amalgam scrap should be recycled (see Mercury Management and Box 4-1). Amalgam scrap in wastewater is an
important issue and separating devices are required in
many regions to separate suspended solid (see Amalgam Waste Management, earlier in this chapter). Chairside and plumbing line filters are available for this purpose. The regulations across the United States are not
yet uniform.
REFERENCES

1. Albers HA:

Tooth-colored restoratives: an introductory text for
selecting, placing and finishing direct systems, ed 8, Santa Rosa,

1986, Alto Books.
2. Allan DN: A longitudinal study of dental restorations, Brit
Dent J 143:87-89, 1977.
3. Alster D et al: Polymerization contraction stress in thin resin
composite layers as a function of layer thickness, Dent Mater
13:146-150,1997.
4. Alster D et al: Tensile strength of thin resin composite layers
as a function of layer thickness, J Dent Res 74:1745-1748,1995.
5. American Dental Association: Accepted dental therapeutics,
ed 40, Chicago, 1984, American Dental Association.
6. American Dental Association: Dentist's desk reference: materials, instruments, and equipment, ed 1, Chicago, 1981, American Dental Association.
7. American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs:
Dental amalgam: update on safety concerns, J Am Dent Assoc 129:493-503, 1998.
8. American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs:
Dental mercury hygiene recommendations, J Am Dent Assoc
130:1125-1126,1999.
9. American Dental Association Council on Dental Materials,
Instruments, and Equipment: Dental mercury hygiene:
summary of recommendations in 1990, J Am Dent Assoc
122(9):112,1991.
10. Ames BN, Gold LS: Too many rodent carcinogens: mitogenesis versus mutagenesis, Science 249:970-971, 1990.
11. Anderson JN: Applied dental materials, ed 6, London, 1976,
Blackwell Scientific Publications.
12. Anusavice KJ: Dental biomaterials III: dental materials for clinical practice, ed 1, Gainesville, 1992, University of Florida.
13. Anusavice KJ: Phillip's science of dental materials, ed 10,
Philadelphia, 1996, WB Saunders.
14. Arenholt-Bindslev D: Dental amalgam-environmental aspects, Adv Dent Res 6:125-130, 1992.
15. Arenholt-Bindslev D et al: Time-related bisphenol-A content and estrogenic activity in saliva samples collected in relation to placement of fissure sealants, Clin Oral Investig
99:120-125, 1999.
16. Avprox Incorporated: http://www.avprox.com.
17. Bader JD et al: Identifying children who will experience high
caries increments, Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 14:198201,1986.

CHAPTER 4

18. Bader JD, Shugars DA: Agreement among dentists' recommendations for restorative treatment, J Dent Res 72:891-896,
1993.
19. Baldissara P, Catapano S, Scotti R: Clinical and histological
evaluation of thermal injury thresholds in human teeth: a
preliminary study, J Oral Rehabil 24:791-801, 1997.
20. Bawden JW: Fluoride varnish: a useful new tool for public
health dentistry, J Public Health Dent 58:266-269, 1998.
21. Bayne SC: CAD/CAM: science and technology, Trans Acad
Dent Mater 2(l):3-7,1989.
22. Bayne SC: Dental composites/glass ionomers: clinical reports. In effects and side effects of dental restorative materials proceedings, Ado Dent Res 6:65-77, 1992.
23. Bayne SC: The mercury controversy (editorial), Quintessence
Int 22(4):247-248, 1991.
24. Bayne SC: What is the future of CAD/CAM materials and
techniques? In Symposium on esthetic restorative materials,
Chicago, 1993, American Dental Association Council on
Dental Materials, Instruments, and Equipment.
25. Bayne SC, Barton RE: Dental materials for direct restorations. In Richardson RE, Barton RE, editors: The dental assistant, ed 6, Philadelphia, 1988, Lea & Febiger.
26. Bayne SC et al: A characterization of first-generation flowable composites, J Am Dent Assoc 129:567-577, 1998.
27. Bayne SC et al: Class V angulation, size, and depth effects on
composite retention (abstract 1669), J Dent Res 71A:314,
1992.
28. Bayne SC et al: Clinical longevity of ten posterior composite
materials based on wear (abstract 630), J Dent Res 70A:344,
1991.
29. Bayne SC et al: Long term clinical failures in posterior composites (abstract 32), J Dent Res 68A:185, 1989.
30. Bayne SC et al: 2-year clinical evaluation of Optibond
stress-breaking DBA in Class-V's, Trans Acad Dent Mater
8:115, P-25,1995.
31. Bayne SC, Fleming JE, Faison S: SEM-EDS analysis of macro
and micro resin tags of laminates (abstract 1128), J Dent Res
61A:304, 1982.
32. Bayne SC, Swift Jr EJ: Solvent analysis of three reducedcomponent dentin bonding systems, Trans Acad Dent Mater
1:156, P-026,1997.
33. Bayne SC, Taylor DF, Heymann HO: Protection hypothesis
for composite wear, Dent Mater 8:305-309, 1992.
34. Bayne SC, Taylor DF, Zardiackas LD: Biomaterials science, ed
6, Chapel Hill, NC, 1992, Brightstar Publishing.
35. Beltran-Aguilar ED, Goldstein JW: Fluoride varnishes-a
review of their clinical use, cariostatic mechanism, efficacy
and safety, J Am Dent Assoc 131:589-596, 2000.
36. Bentley C, Drake CW: Longevity of restorations in a dental
school clinic, J Dent Educ 50:594-600, 1986.
37. Bowen RL: Dental filling material comprising vinyl silane
treated fused silica and a binder consisting of the reaction
product of BIS phenol and glycidyl acrylate (US Patent
3,066,112), 1962.
38. Boyd ND et al: Mercury from dental "silver" tooth fillings
impairs sheep kidney function, Am J Physiol 261(4 Pt 2):
R1010-1014,1991.
39. Braem M et al: In vivo evaluation of four posterior composites: quantitative wear measurements and clinical behavior,
Dent Mater 2:106-113, 1986.
40. Bratel J, Haraldson T, Ottosson JO: Potential side effects of
dental amalgam restorations. II: No relation between mercury levels in the body and mental disorder, Eur J Oral Sci
105:244-250, 1997.

Dental Materials

41. Buonocore MG: Simple method of increasing the adhesion
of acrylic filling materials to enamel surfaces, J Dent Res 34:
849-853,1955.
42. Cagle CV: Handbook of adhesive bonding, ed 1, New York,
1973, McGraw-Hill.
43. Chai JY,YeungT: Wettability of nonaqueous elastomeric impression materials, Int J Prosthodont 4:555-560, 1991.
44. Chang SB, Siew C, Gruninger SE: Factors affecting blood
mercury concentrations in practicing dentists, J Dent Res 71:
66-74,1992.
45. Charles AD: The story of dental amalgam, Bull Hist Dent 30:
2-6,1982.
46. Choi KK Condon JR, Ferracane JL: The effects of adhesive
thickness on polymerization contraction stress of composite, J Dent Res 79:812-817, 2000.
47. Clemmensen S: Sensitizing potential of 2-hydroxyethylmethacrylate, Contact Dermatitis 12:203-208, 1985.
48. Clinical Research Associates: Materials use survey, CRA
Newsletter 19(10):3-4, 1995.
49. Clinical Research Associates: Use survey-1990, CRA
Newsletter 14(12):1, 1990.
50. Collins CJ, Bryant RW: Finishing of amalgam restorations: a
three-year clinical trial, J Dent Res 20:202-206, 1992.
51. Combe EC: Notes on dental materials, ed 4, Edinburgh, 1981,
Churchill Livingstone.
52. Condon JR, Ferracane JL: Assessing the effect of composite
formulation on polymerization stress, J Am Dent Assoc 131:
497-503, 2000.
53. Condon JR, Ferracane JL: Evaluation of composite wear
with a new multi-mode oral wear simulator, Dent Mater 12:
218-226,1996.
54. Cook WD: Factors affecting the depth of cure of UV-polymerized composites, J Dent Res 59:800-808, 1980.
55. Cooley RL, Stilley J, Lubow RM: Mercury vapor produced
during sterilization of amalgam-contaminated instruments,
J Prosthet Dent 53:304-308, 1985.
56. Crabb HSM: The survival of dental restorations in a teaching hospital, Brit Dent J 150:315-318, 1981.
57. Craig RG: Dental materials-a problem oriented approach,
ed 1, St Louis, 1978, Mosby.
58. Craig RG: Overview of posterior composite resins for use in
clinical practice. In Vanherle G, Smith DC, editors: Posterior
composite resin dental restorative materials, Netherlands, 1985,
Peter Szulc Publishing.
59. Craig RG: Restorative dental materials, ed 11, St Louis, 2001,
Mosby.
60. Craig RG, Powers JM, Wataha JC: Dental materials: properties
and manipulation, ed 7, St Louis, 2000, Mosby.
61. Cvar JF, Ryge G: Criteria for the clinical evaluation of dental
restorative materials (US Dept HEW PHS, Publ No 7902244),
Dental Health Center, San Francisco, 1973, US Government
Printing Office.
62. Dauvillier BS et al: Visco-elastic parameters of dental restorative materials during setting, J Dent Res 79:818-823, 2000.
63. Davidson CL, Feilzer AJ: Polymerization shrinkage and
polymerization shrinkage stress in polymer-based restoratives, J Dent 25:435-440, 1997.
64. Davidson CL, Van Zeghbroeck L, Feilzer AJ: Destructive
stresses in adhesive luting cements, J Dent Res 70:880-882,
1991.
65. Davidson-Kaban SS et al: The effect of curing light variations on bulk curing and wall-to-wall quality of two types and
various shades of resin composites, Dent Mater 13:344-352,
1997.

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

66. Dawson AS, Smales RJ: Restoration longevity in an Australian defense force population, Aust Dent J 37:196-200,
1992.
67. Demaree NC, Taylor DF: Properties of dental amalgams
made from spherical alloy powders, J Dent Res 41:890-906,
1962.
68. Dental Recycling of North America: http://www.drna.com.
69. Disney JA et al: The University of North Carolina caries risk
assessment study: further developments in caries risk assessment, Community Dent Oral Epidemio120:64-75, 1992.
70. Eames WB: Preparation and condensation of amalgam with
low mercury-alloy ratio, J Am Dent Assoc 58(4):78-83, 1959.
71. Eames WB et al: Accuracy and dimensional stability of elastomeric impression materials, J Prosthet Dent 42:159-162,
1979.
72. Eastman J, Siegel RW: Nanophase synthesis assembles materials from atomic clusters, Res Devel 56-60, Jan 1989.
74. Elderton RJ: Longitudinal study of dental treatment in the
general dental service in Scotland, Brit Dent J 155:91-96,
1983.
75. Ericson D, Derand T: Increase of in vitro curing depth of
class Il composite resin restorations, J Prosthet Dent 70:219223,1993.
76. Evans FG: Mechanical properties of bone, ed 1, Springfield, Ill,
1973, Charles C Thomas Publisher.
77. Fan PL, O'Brien WJ, Craig RG: Wetting properties of
sealants and glazes, Oper Dent 4:100-103, 1979.
78. Feilzer AJ, De Gee AJ, Davidson CL: Relaxation of polymerization contraction shear stress by hygroscopic expansion,
J Dent Res 69:36-39, 1990.
79. Feilzer AJ, De Gee AJ, Davidson CL: Quantitative determination of stress reduction by flow in composite restorations,
Dent Mater 6:167-171, 1990.
80. Feilzer AJ, De Gee AJ, Davidson CL: Setting stresses in composites for two different curing modes, Dent Mater 9:2-5,
1993.
81. Feilzer AJ, De Gee AJ, Davidson CL: Setting stress in composite resin in relation to configuration of the restoration,
J Dent Res 66:1636-1639, 1987.
82. Feilzer AJ et al: Influence of light intensity on polymerization shrinkage and integrity of restoration-cavity interface,
Eur J Oral Sci 103:322-326, 1995.
83. Ferracane JL: Materials in dentistry-principles and applications, Philadelphia, 1995, JP Lippincott.
84. Freund M, Munksgaard EC: Enzymatic degradation of BisGMA/TEGDMA-polymers causing decreased microhardness and greater wear in vitro, Scand J Dent Res 98:351-355,
1990.
85. Fried K: Changes in innervation of dentine and pulp with
age. In Ferguson DF, editor: The aging mouth, Basel, 1987,
Karger.
86. Fung EY et al: Pharmacokinetics of bisphenol-A released
from a dental sealant, J Am Dent Assoc 131:51-58, 2000.
87. Geurtsen W et al: Aqueous extracts from dentin adhesives
contain cytotoxic chemicals, J Biomed Mater Res 48:772-777,
1999.
88. Geurtsen W et al: Cytotoxicity of 35 dental resin composite
monomers/additives in permanent 3T3 and three human primary fibroblast cultures, J Biomed Mater Res 41:474-480, 1998.
89. Gold LS et al: Rodent carcinogens: setting priorities, Science
258:261-265, 1992.
90. Greener EH, Harcourt JK, Lautenschlager EP: Materials science in dentistry, Baltimore, 1972, Williams & Wilkins.

91. Grippo JO, Masi JV: Role of biodental engineering factors
(BEF) in the etiology of root caries, J Esthet Dent 3:71-76,
1991.
92. Grossman DG: Structure and physical properties of Dicor/
MGC glass-ceramic. Proceedings of the International Symposium on Computer Restorations, Chicago, 1991, Quintessence.
93. Guggenberger R, May R, Stefan KP: New trends in glassionomer chemistry, Biomaterials 19:479-483, 1998.
94. Hahn LJ et al: Dental "silver"tooth fillings: a source of mercury exposure revealed by whole-body image scan and tissue analysis, FASEB J 3:2641-2646, 1989.
95. Haines D, Berry DC, Poole DEG: Behavior of tooth enamel
under load, J Dent Res 42:885-888, 1963.
96. Harada M: Minamata disease: methylmercury poisoning in
Japan caused by environmental pollution, Crit Rev Toxicol
25:1-24, 1995.
97. Hasegawa J: Dental casting materials, Trans Acad Dent Mater
2(3):190-201,1989.
98. Helkimo E, Carlsson GE, Helkimo M: Bite force and state of
dentition, Acta Odont Scand 35:297-303, 1977.
99. Hench LL, Ethridge EC: Biomaterials, an interfacial approach,
ed 1, NewYork, 1982, Academic Press.
100. Hero H, Okabe T, Wie H: Corrosion of gallium alloys in vivo,
J Mat Sci Mat Med 8:357-360, 1997.
101. Hero H, Simensen CJ, Jorgensen RB: Structure of dental gallium alloys, Biomaterials 17:1321-1326, 1996.
102. Heymann HO et al: The clinical performance of CAD-CAMgenerated ceramic inlays: a four-year study, J Am Dent Assoc
127:1171-1181,1996.
103. Heymann HO et al: Tooth flexure effects on cervical restorations: a two-year study, J Am Dent Assoc 122:41-47, 1991.
104. Heymann HO et al: Two-year clinical performance of
CEREC CAD/CAM-generated MGC inlays (abstract 814),
J Dent Res 71A:207, 1992.
105. Heymann HO et al: Two-year clinical study of composite
resins in posterior teeth, Dent Mater 2:37-41, 1986.
106. Hickel R et al: CAD/CAM-Fillings or the future? Inter Dent
J 47:247-258, 1997.
107. H6rsted-Bindslev P et al: Dental amalgam-a health hazard?,
Copenhagen, Denmark, 1991, Munksgaard.
108. ller RK: The chemistry of silica. Solubility, polymerization, colloid, and surface properties, and biochemistry, NewYork, 1979,
John Wiley & Sons.
109. Innes DBK, Youdelis WV: Dispersion strengthened amalgams, J Can Dent Assoc 29:587-593, 1963.
110. Inokoshi S et al: Dual-cure luting composites. 1: Filler particle distribution, J Oral Rehabil 20:133-146, 1993.
111. Isenberg BP Essig ME, Leinfelder KF: Three-year clinical
evaluation of CAD/CAM restorations, J Esthet Dent 4:173175,1992.
112. Jaarda MJ et al: Measurement of composite resin filler particles by using scanning electron microscopy and digital
i maging, J Prosthet Dent 69:416-424, 1993.
113. Johnson GH, Gordon GE, Bales DJ: Postoperative sensitivity
associated with posterior composite and amalgam restorations, Oper Dent 13:66-73, 1988.
114. Jorgensen KD: The mechanism of marginal fracture of amalgam fillings, Acta Odont Scand 23:347-389, 1965.
115. Jorgensen KD: Occlusal abrasion of a composite resin with
ultra-fine filler-an initial study, Quintessence Int 6:73-78,
1978.
116. Kaga M et al: Gallium alloy restorations in primary teeth: a
12-month study, J Am Dent Assoc 127:1195-1201, 1996.

CHAPTER

5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

F I G .5-2

A, Twenty-two-year-old patient fractured the maxill ary left central incisor in an accident, but recovered the fractured fragment. B, Exposed dentin and peripheral enamel were
etched with 35% phosphoric acid for 15 seconds. The fractured
fragment was etched in the same manner. A dentin adhesive
was applied to the etched surfaces and the fragment was
adapted to the fractured area. After ensuring a tight and close
adaptation, the area was light-cured for 40 seconds from the
facial and 40 seconds from the lingual.

7. Seal pits and fissures of posterior teeth.
8. Bond orthodontic brackets.
9. Bond periodontal splints and conservative toothreplacement restorations.
10. Repair existing restorations (composite, amalgam,
or ceramic).
11. Provide foundations for crowns.
12. Desensitize exposed root surfaces.
13. Impregnate dentin that has been exposed to the oral
fluids, making it less susceptible to caries.
14. Bond fractured fragments of anterior teeth (Fig. 5-2).
15. Bond prefabricated and cast posts.
16. Reinforce fragile roots internally.
17. Seal apical restorations placed during endodontic
surgery.

ADVANTAGES OF
ENAMEL ADHESION
As measured in the laboratory, bond strengths of composite to phosphoric acid-etched enamel usually exceed
20 MPa. 95,162,303 Such bond strengths provide adequate
retention for a broad variety of procedures and prevent
microleakage around enamel margins of restorations .
Adhesive restorations provide other benefits such as
cusp reinforcement after tooth preparation . 302 Adhesive
restorations substantially reinforce remaining enamel and
dentin, making them less susceptible to fracture .

ENAMEL ADHESION
Inspired by the industrial use of 85% phosphoric acid to
facilitate adhesion of paints and resins to metallic surfaces, Buonocore envisioned the use of acids to etch
enamel for sealing pits and fissures. Since Buonocore's

FIG . 5-3

Scanning electron micrograph of enamel etched with
36% phosphoric acid (Dentsply DeTrey, Konstanz, Germany) for
30 seconds.

introduction of the acid-etch technique, many dental researchers have attempted to achieve methods for reliable and durable adhesion between resins and tooth
structure.
Acid-etching transforms the smooth enamel into a
very irregular surface (Fig. 5-3), and also increases its
surface free energy. When a fluid resin-based material is
applied to the irregular etched surface, the resin penetrates into the surface, aided by capillary action. Monomers in the material polymerize, and the material becomes interlocked with the enamel surface (Fig. 5-4).15.1'
The formation of resin microtags within the enamel surface is the fundamental mechanism of adhesion of resin
Fig. 5-5 shows a mold of an etched
to enameL.
enamel surface visualized through the extensions of
resin that penetrated the irregular enamel surface. The
acid-etch technique has significantly changed the practice of restorative dentistry.
Enamel etching results in three different micromorphologic patterns .123,281 Type I involves the dissolution of
prism cores without dissolution of prism peripheries
(Fig. 5-6). The Type 11 etching pattern is the opposite of
Type I-the peripheral enamel is dissolved, but the
cores are left intact (see Fig. 5-3). Type III etching is less
distinct than the other two patterns. It includes areas
that resemble the other patterns and areas whose topography is not related to enamel prism morphology.
Beginning with Buonocore's use of 85% phosphoric
acid, various concentrations of phosphoric acid have
been used to etch enamel. Gwinnett and Buonocore suggested the use of lower acid concentrations to prevent
the formation of precipitates that could interfere with
adhesion . 126 Application of 50% phosphoric acid for 60
seconds results in formation of a monocalcium phosphate monohydrate precipitate that can be rinsed off.
However, concentrations below 27% may create a dicalcium phosphate monohydrate precipitate that cannot be
easily removed and, consequently, may interfere with

234

CHAPTER 4

Dental Materials

268. Xu HHK et al: Two-body sliding wear of a direct-filling silver
alternative to amalgam, Quintessence Int 30:199-208, 1999.
269. Yamada H: Strength of biological materials, ed 1, Huntington
NY, 1973, RE Krieger.
270. Yamauchi M, Woodley DT, Mechanic GT: Aging and crosslinking of skin collagen, Biochem Biophys Res Commun 158:
898-903,1988.
271. Yoshii E: Cytotoxic effects of acrylates and methacrylates: relationships of monomer structures and cytotoxicity, J Biomed
Mater Res 37:517-524, 1997.

272. Zach L, Cohen G: Pulp response to externally applied heat,
Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Path 19:515-530, 1965.
273. Zach L, Cohen G: Thermogenesis in operative techniquescomparison of four methods, J Prosthet Dent 12:977-984,
1962.
274. Zardiackas LD, Bayne SC: Fatigue characterization of nine
dental amalgams, Biomat 6:49-54,1985.
275. Zu JJK et al: Three-body wear of a hand-consolidated silver
alternative to amalgam, J Dent Res 78:1560-1567, 1999.

CHAPTER 4

117. KinomotoY et al: Comparison of polymerization contraction
stresses between self and light-curing composites, J Dent
27:383-389, 1999.
118. Koch G, Petersson LC: Fluoride content of enamel surface
treated with a varnish containing sodium fluoride, Odontol
Rev 23:437-446, 1972.
119. Krejci I et al: Wear of ceramic inlays, their enamel antagonists, and luting cements,] Prosthet Dent 69:425-430, 1993.
120. Lammie GA: A comparison of the cutting efficiency and
heat production of tungsten carbide and steel burs, Brit Dent
J 90:251-259, 1951.
121. Lang BR, Jaarda M, Wang RF: Filler particle size and composite resin classification systems, J Oral Rehabil 19:569-684,
1992.
122. Larmas MA, Hayrynen H, Lajunen LHJ: Thermogravimetric
studies on sound and carious human enamel and dentin as
well as hydroxyapatite, Scand J Dent Res 101:185-191, 1993.
123. Lee WC, Eakle WS: Possible role of tensile stress in the etiology of cervical erosive lesions of teeth, J Prosthet Dent 52:
374-380, 1984.
124. Leinfelder KF: Composites: current status and future developments. In International state-of-the-art conference on restorative dental materials, Bethesda, Md, 1986, National Institute
of Dental Research.
125. Leinfelder KF: Wear patterns and rates of posterior composite resins, Int Dent J 37:152-157, 1987.
126. Leinfelder KF, Bayne SC, Swift EJ: Packable composites:
overview and technical considerations, J Esthet Dent 11:234249,1999.
127. Leinfelder KF, Bayne SC, Swift Jr EJ: Packable composites:
overview and technical considerations, J Esthet Dent 11:234249,1999.
128. Leinfelder KF et al: An in vitro device for determining wear
of posterior composites (abstract 636), J Dent Res 70A:345,
1991.
129. Leinfelder KF et al: Burnished amalgam restorations: a twoyear clinical evaluation, Oper Dent 3:2-8, 1978.
130. Leinfelder KF, Lemons JF: Clinical restorative materials and
techniques, ed 1, Philadelphia, 1988, Lea & Febiger.
131. Letzel H: Four-year survival and failures of posterior composite restorations in a multicentre controlled clinical trial
(abstract 197), J Dent Res 68A:206, 1989.
132. Letzel H et al: Materials influences on the survival of amalgam and composite restorations (abstract 1426), J Dent Res
69A:287,1990.
133. Letzel H, Vrijhoef MMA: Survival rates of dental amalgam
restorations (abstract 820), J Dent Res 61A:269, 1982.
134. Lutz F et al: In vivo and in vitro wear of potential posterior
composites, J Dent Res 63:914-920, 1984.
135. Lutz F, Phillips RW: A classification and evaluation of composite resin systems, J Prosthet Dent 50:480-488, 1983.
136. 3M: Personal Air Monitoring Systems: 3600 mercury vapor
monitor, http://www.mmm.com.US/safety/produts/ohes/ .
137. Mackert JR: Dental amalgam and mercury, J Am Dent Assoc
122(8):54-61, 1991.
138. Mackert JR et al: Lymphocyte levels in subjects with and
without amalgam restorations, J Am Dent Assoc 122(3):4953,1991.
139. Mahler DB: Standardizing amalgam marginal fracture evaluation (abstract 445), J Dent Res 65:219, 1986.
140. Mahler DB, Peyton FA: Photoelasticity as a research technique for analyzing stress in dental structures, J Dent Res 34:
831-838,1955.

Dental Materials

141. Mahler DB, Terkla LC: Analysis of stress in dental structures.
In Dental Clinics of North America: symposium on dental materials, Philadelphia, 1958, WB Saunders.
142. Mahler DB, Terkla LG, Eysden JV: Marginal fracture of amalgam restorations, J Dent Res 52:823-827, 1973.
143. Mandel ID: Amalgam hazards. an assessment of research,
J Am Dent Assoc 122(8):62-65, 1991.
144. Mandikos MN: Polyvinyl siloxane impression materials: an
update on clinical use, Aust Dent J 43:428-434, 1998.
145. Marshall GW Sarkar NK, Greener EH: Detection of oxygen
in corrosion products of dental amalgam, J Dent Res 54:904,
1975.
146. Marshall SJ, Marshall GW Jr: Sn 4(OH)6Cl2 and SnO corrosion products on amalgams, J Dent Res 59:820-823, 1980.
147. McCabe JF: Applied dental materials, ed 2, London, 1990,
Blackwell Scientific.
148. McCabe JF: Resin-modified glass-ionomes, Biomaterials
19:521-527,1998.
149. McCabe JF, Carrick TE: Output from visible-light activation
units and depth of cure of light-activated composites, J Dent
Res 68:1534-1539, 1989.
150. The mercury in your mouth: you can avoid amalgam fillings
or even replace the ones you have, but should you? Consumer Reports 316-319, May 1991.
151. The mercury scare: if a dentist wants to remove your fillings
because they contain mercury, watch your wallet, Consumer
Reports 51(3):150-152,1986.
152. Mertz-Fairhurst EJ et al: A comparative clinical study of two
pit and fissure sealants: 7-year results in Augusta, Ga, J Am
Dent Assoc 109:252-255, 1984.
153. Mertz-Fairhurst EJ et al: Ultraconservative and cariostatic
sealed restorations: results at year 10, J Am Dent Assoc 129:
55-66,1998.
154. Meyer JM, Cattani-Lorente MA, Dupuis V: Compomers: between glass-ionomer cements and composites, Biomaterials
19:529-539, 1998.
155. Mitra SB, Li MY; Culler SR: Setting reaction of Vitrebond
light cure glass ionomer liner/base. In Setting mechanisms
of dental materials, Trans Acad Dent Mater 5(2):1-22, 1992.
156. Mjor IA: Frequency of secondary caries at various anatomical locations, Oper Dent 10:88-92, 1985.
157. Mjor IA: Placement and replacement of restorations, Oper
Dent 6:49-54, 1981.
158. Molin C: Amalgam-fact and fiction, Scand J Dent Res 100:
66-73,1992.
159. MomoiY et al: A suggested method for mixing direct filling
restorative gallium alloy, Oper Dent 21:12-16, 1996.
160. Morin DL et al: Biophysical stress analysis of restored teeth:
modeling and analysis, Dent Mater 4:77-84, 1988.
161. Mormann W, Krejci I: Computer-designed inlays after 5
years in situ: clinical performance and scanning electron microscope evaluation, Quintessence Int 23:109-115, 1992.
162. Morris HE Veterans Administration Cooperative Studies
Project No. 147. Part VIII: Plaque accumulation on metal ceramic restorations cast from noble and nickel-based alloys:
a five-year report, JProsthet Dent 61:543-549, 1989.
163. Mount GJ: Glass ionomer cements: clinical considerations,
In Clinical dentistry, NewYork, 1984, Harper & Row.
164. Mount GJ: Restoration with glass-ionomer cement: requirements for clinical success, Oper Dent 6:59-65, 1981.
165. Munksgaard EC: Permeability of protective gloves to
(di)methacrylates in resinous dental materials, Scand J Dent
Res 100:189-192, 1992.

CHAPTER

4

Dental Materials

166. Munksgaard EC, Freund M: Enzymatic hydrolysis of
(di)methacrylates and their polymers, Scand J Dent Res
98:261-267, 1990.
167. Nakabayashi N, Ashizawa M, Nakamura M: Identification
of a resin-dentin hybrid layer in vital human dentin created
in vivo: durable bonding to vital dentin, Quintessence Int
23:135-141,1992.
168. Nash KD, Bentley JE: Is restorative dentistry on its way out?
J Am Dent Assoc 122(9):79-80, 1991.
169. Nathanson D et al: In vitro elution of leachable components
from dental sealants, J Am Dent Assoc 128:1517-1523, 1997.
170. National Institutes of Health: Consensus development conference statement on dental sealants in the prevention of
tooth decay, J Am Dent Assoc 108:233-236, 1984.
171. National Institutes of Health: Effects and side effects of dental restorative materials-NIHTechnology Assessment Conference Statement, Natl Lib Med 1-18, 1991.
172. Navarro MFL et al: Clinical evaluation of gallium alloy as a posterior restorative material, Quintessence Int 27:315-320, 1996.
173. Nicholson JW, Wasson EA: The setting of glass -polyalkenoate
("glass-ionomer") cements. In Setting mechanisms of dental
materials, Trans Aead Dent Mater 5(2):1-14, 1992.
174. Noda M, Komatsu H, Sano H: HPLC analysis of dental resin
composite components, J Biomed Mater Res 47:374-378,1999.
175. Norman RD, Wilson NHF: Three-year findings of a multicentre trial for a posterior composite, J Prosthet Dent 59:577583, 1986.
176. O'Brien WJ: Dental materials and their selection, ed 2,
Chicago, 1997, Quintessence.
177. O'Brien WJ, Fan PL, Apostolides A: Penetrativity of sealants
and glazes, Oper Dent 3:51-56, 1978.
178. O'Brien WJ, Ryge G: An outline of dental materials and their
selection, ed 1, Philadelphia, 1990, WB Saunders.
179. Odom JG: Ethics and dental amalgam removal, J Am Dent
Assoc 122(7):69-71, 1991.
180. OkamotoY, Horibe T: Liquid gallium alloys for metallic plastic fillings, Brit Dent J 170:23-26, 1991.
181. Olea N et al: Estrogenicity of resin-based composites and
sealants used in dentistry, Environ Health Perspect 104:298305,1996.
182. Opdam NJ et al: Marginal integrity and postoperative sensitivity in Class 2 resin composite restorations in vivo, J Dent
26:555-562, 1998.
183. Opdam NJ et al: A radiographic and scanning electron microscopic study of approximal margins of Class II resin composite restorations placed in vivo, J Dent 26:319-327, 1998.
184. Osborne JW, Berry TG: Zinc-containing high-copper amalgams: a 3-year clinical evaluation, Am J Dent 5:43-45, 1992.
185. Osborne JW et al: Clinical performance and physical properties of twelve amalgam alloys, J Dent Res 57:983-988,1978.
186. Osborne JW, Summit JB: Direct-placement gallium restorative alloy: a 3-year clinical evaluation, Quintessence Int 30:
49-53,1999.
187. Osborne JW, Summtt JB: 2-year clinical evaluation of a gallium restorative alloy, Am J Dent 9:191-194, 1996.
188. Oysaed H, Ruyter IE, Sjovik-Kleven IJ: Release of formaldehyde from dental composites, J Dent Res 67:1289-1294,1988.
189. Park JB: Biomaterials: an introduction, ed 1, New York, 1979,
Plenum.
190. Patterson N: The longevity of restorations: a study of 200
regular attenders in a general dental practice, Brit Dent J
157:23-25, 1984.
191. Petersson LG: On topical application of fluorides and its inhibiting effect on caries, Odontol Revy Suppl 34:1-36,1975.

192. Petersson LG et al: Effect of quarterly treatments with a
chlorhexidine and a fluoride varnish on approximal caries in
caries-susceptible teenagers: a 3-year clinical study, Caries
Res 34:140-13, 2000.
193. Peyton FA: Restorative dental materials, ed 3, St Louis, 1968,
Mosby.
194. Phillips RW: Skinner's science of dental materials, ed 9,
Philadelphia, 1991, WB Saunders.
195. Phillips RW, Moore BK: Elements of dental materials: for dental hygienists and dental assistants, ed 5, Philadelphia, 1994,
WB Saunders.
196. Port RM, Marshall GW: Characteristics of amalgam restorations with variable clinical appearance, J Am Dent Assoc
110:491-495,1985.
197. Powers JM, Capp JA, Koran A: Color of gingival tissues of
blacks and whites, J Dent Res 56:112-116, 1977.
198. Preston JD, Duret F: CAD/CAM in dentistry, Oral Health
87:17-27,1997.
199. Pulgar R et al: Determination of bisphenol A and related
aromatic compounds released from bis-GMA-based composites and sealants by high performance liquid chromatography, Environ Health Perspect 108:21-27, 2000.
200. Putnam JJ: Quicksilver and slow death, National Geographic
142(4):507-527,1972.
201. Rakich DR et al: Effects of dentin bonding agents on
macrophage mitochondrial activity, J Endod 24:528-533, 1998.
202. Reese JA, Valega TM: Restorative dental materials: an overview,
vol 1, Guildford, Surrey, 1985, FDI, Biddles.
203. Rehfeld RL et al: Evolution of various forms of calcium hydroxide in the monitoring of microleakage, Dent Mater
7:202-205, 1991.
204. Reisbick MH: Dental materials in clinical dentistry, ed 1,
Boston, 1982, John Wright PSG.
205. Retief DH, Mallory WP: Evaluation of two pit and fissure
sealants: an in vitro study, Pediatr Dent 3:12-16, 1981.
206. Rinne VW: Aluminum foil pouch packaging in pre-measured amalgam capsules, J Dent Res 62:116-117, 1983.
207. Ripa LW: Occlusal sealing: rationale of the technique and
historical review, J Am Soc Prev Dent 3:32-39, 1973.
208. Roberson TM et al: Five-year clinical wear analysis of 19
posterior composites (abstract 63), J Dent Res 67A:120, 1988.
209. Robinson AD: The life of a filling, Br Dent J 130:206-208,
1971.
210. Ross GK et al: Measurement of deformation of teeth in vivo
(abstract 432), J Dent Res 71A:569, 1992.
211. Rothwell PS, Frame JW, Shimmin CV: Mercury vapor hazards from hot air sterilisers in dental practice, Br Dent J
142:359-365, 1977.
212. Roulet JF: Degradation of dental polymers, Basel, 1987, Karger.
213. Ruddell DE et al: Mechanical properties and wear behavior
of condensable composites (abstract 407), J Dent Res 78:156,
1999.
214. Ruse ND: What is a"compomer"?, J Can Dent Assoc 65:500504,1999.
215. Ryge G: Clinical criteria, Int Dent J 30:347-358, 1980.
216. Santerre JP, Shajii L, Tsang H: Biodegradation of commercial
dental composites by cholesterol esterase, J Dent Res
78:1459-1468, 1999.
217. Schafer TE et al: Estrogenicity of bisphenol A and bisphenol A
dimethacrylate in vitro, J Biomed Mater Res 45:192-197, 1999.
218. Scheinin A et al: Multifactorial modeling for root caries predictions, Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 20:35-37, 1992.
219. Schmidt C: In vitro toothbrushing/dentifrice wear of resinbased materials used to seal or repair dental restorations

CHAPTER 4

(Master's thesis), D.A.T.E., Division of Dental Hygiene, Department of Dental Ecology, School of Dentistry, Chapel
Hill, NC, 1998, University of North Carolina.
220. Seghi RR, Denry IL, Rosenstiel SF: Relative fracture toughness and hardness of new dental ceramics, J Prosthet Dent
74:145-150,1995.
221. Seghi RR, Sorensen JA: Relative flexural strength of six new
ceramic materials, Int J Prosthodont 8:239-246, 1995.
222. Silverstone LM et al: Variation in the pattern of acid etching
of human dental enamel examined by scanning electron microscopy, Caries Res 9:373-387, 1975.
223. Silvey RG, Myers GE: Clinical study of dental cements. VII.
A study of bridge retainers luted with three different dental
cements, J Dent Res 57:703-707, 1978.
224. Simmons JJ: The miracle mixture: glass ionomer and alloy
powder, Tex Dent J 100:10-12, 1983.
225. Simonsen RJ: Retention and effectiveness of dental sealant
after 15 years, J Am Dent Assoc 122(11):34-42, 1992.
226. Skinner EW, Phillips RW: Direct filling gold and its manipulation. In Science of dental materials, ed 6, Philadelphia,
1967, WB Sounders.
227. Smales RJ: Long-term deterioration of composite resin and
amalgam restorations, Oper Dent 16:202-209, 1991.
228. Smales RJ et al: Prediction of amalgam restoration longevity,
J Dent 19:18-23, 1991.
229. Smales RJ, Gao W: In vitro caries inhibition at the enamel
margins of glass ionomer restoratives developed for the ART
technique, J Dent 28:249-256, 2000.
230. Smales RJ, Webster DA, Leppard PI: Predictions of restoration deterioration, J Dent 20:215-220, 1992.
231. Smith DC: Development of glass-ionomer cement systems,
Biomaterials 19:467-478, 1998.
232. Smith DL, Caul HJ: Alloys of gallium with powdered metals
as possible replacement for dental amalgam, J Am Dent Assoc
53:315-324, 1956.
233. Soderholm KJ: Correlation of in vivo and in vitro performance of adhesive restorative materials: a report of the ASC
MD156 task group for the adhesion of restorative materials,
Dent Mater 7:74-83, 1991.
234. Soderholm KJ: Degradation of glass filler in experimental
composites, J Dent Res 60:1867-1875, 1981.
235. Spencer P et al: Chemical characterization of the dentin/adhesive interface by Fourier transform photoacoustic spectroscopy, Dent Mater 8:8-10, 1992.
236. Stock A: Die gefahrlichkeit des quecksilberdampfes and der
amalgame, Med Min 22:1209-1212, 1250-1252,1926.
237. Sturdevant JR et al: The 8-year clinical performance of 15
low-gold casting alloys, Dent Mater 3:347-352, 1987.
238. Sturdevant JR et al: Ten-year clinical analysis of 3 barium
glass filled posterior composites (abstract 794), J Dent Res
71A:204, 1992.
239. Takahashi H, Finger WJ: Dentin surface reproduction with
hydrophilic and hydrophobic impression materials, Dent
Mater 7:197-201, 1991.
240. Taylor DF et al: Pooling of long term clinical wear data for
posterior composites, Am J Dentistry 7(6):167-174.
241. Taylor NO, Paffenbarger GC, Sweeney WT: Inlay casting
golds: physical properties and specification, J Am Dent Assoc
19:36-53,1932.
242. Thompson JY Bayne SC, Heymann HO: Mechanical properties of a new mica-based machinable glass ceramic for
CAD/CAM restorations, J Prosthet Dent 76:619-623, 1996.
243. Thompson JY, Rapp MM, Parker AJ: Microscopic and energy
dispersive x-ray analysis of surface adaptation of dental ce-

Dental Materials

ments to dental ceramic surfaces, J Prosthet Dent 79:378-383,
1998.
244. Thompson VP, Williams EF, Bailey WJ: Dental resins with reduced shrinkage during hardening, J Dent Res 58:1522-1532,
1979.
245. Tomashov ND: Theory of corrosion and protection of metals, ed
1, NewYork, 1966, Macmillan.
246. Vanherle G, Lambrechts P, Braem M: Overview of the clinical requirements for posterior composites. In Vanherle G,
Smith DC, editors: Posterior composite resin dental restorative
materials, Netherlands, 1985, Peter Szulc.
247. Van Meerbeek B et al: Microscopy investigations: techniques, results, and limitations, Am J Dent 13:3D-18D,
2000.
248. Venugopalan R Broome JC, Lucas LC: The effect of water
contamination on dimensional change and corrosion properties of a gallium alloy, Dent Mater 14:173-178, 1998.
249. Vimy MF, TakahashiY, Lorscheider FL: Maternal-fetal distribution of mercury (3Hg) released from dental amalgam fillings, Am J Physiol 258(4-Pt2):R939-945, 1990.
250. Vimy MJ, Lorscheider FL: Intro-oral air mercury released
from dental amalgam, J Dent Res 64:1069-1071, 1985.
251. Von Fraunhofer JA: Scientific aspects of dental materials, ed 1,
London, 1975, Butterworth.
252. Vrijhoef MMA, Vermeersch AG, Spanauf AJ: Dental amalgam, Chicago, 1980, Quintessence.
253. Waterstrat RM: New alloys show extraordinary resistance to
fracture and wear, J Am Dent Assoc 123(12):33-36, 1992.
254. Wilder AD et al: Five-year clinical study of UV polymerized
posterior composites, J Dent 19:214-220, 1991.
255. Wilder AD et al: Long term clinical color-matching analysis for
30 dental composites (abstract 801), J Dent Res 71A:206, 1992.
256. Wilder AD Jr et al: Seventeen-year clinical study of ultravioletcured posterior composite Class I and II restorations, J Esthet
Dent 11:135-142,1999.
257. Wilkerson MD et al: Biaxial flexure strength and fracture
toughness of flowable composites (abstract 779), J Dent Res
77:203, 1998.
258. Willems G et al: A classification of dental composites according to their morphological and mechanical characteristics. Dent Mater 8:310-319, 1992.
259. Willems G et al: Composite resins in the twenty-first century, Quintessence Int 24:641-658, 1993.
260. Willer J, Rossbach A, Weber H: Computer-assisted milling of
dental restorations using a new CAD/CAM data acquisition
system, J Prosthet Dent 80:346-353, 1998.
261. Wilson AD, Kent BE: A new translucent cement for dentistrythe glass ionomer cement, Brit Dent J 132:133-135, 1972.
262. Wilson HJ, McLean JW, Brown D: Dental materials and their
clinical applications, ed 1, London, 1988, British Dental Association, William Clowes.
263. World Health Organization: Environmental health criteria 118:
inorganic mercury, Geneva, Switzerland, 1991, World Health
Organization.
264. Wu W, Cobb EN: A silver staining technique for investigating wear of restorative dental composites, J Biomed Mater
Res 15:343-348, 1981.
265. Xu HHK: Dental composite resins containing silica-fused
ceramic single-crystalline whiskers with various filler levels,
J Dent Res 78:1304-1311, 1999.
266. Xu HHK et al: Ceramic whisker reinforcement of dental
resin composites, J Dent Res 78:706-712, 1999.
267. Xu HHK et al: Cyclic contact fatigue of a silver alternative to
amalgam, Dent Mater 14:11-20, 1998.

I.
II.
III.
I V.
V.

Basic concepts of adhesion, 237
Recent trends in restorative dentistry, 237
Advantages of enamel adhesion, 238
Enamel adhesion, 238
Dentin adhesion, 239
A. Challenges in dentin bonding, 240
1. Substrate, 240
2. Stresses at the resin-dentin interface, 243
B. Development of dentin bonding
systems, 244
1. The beginning, 244
2. First-generation dentin adhesives, 244
3. Second-generation dentin adhesives, 244
4. Third-generation dentin adhesives, 244
5. Fourth-generation dentin adhesives, 245

VI.

6. Fifth-generation dentin adhesives, 245
7. Current strategies, 247
C. Role of the hybrid layer, 250
D. Moist versus dry dentin surfaces, 251
E. Role of proteins in dentin bonding, 254
F. Microleakage, 254
G. Biocompatibility, 255
H. Relevance of in vitro studies, 256
I. Clinical factors in dentin adhesion, 257
J. New clinical indications for dentin
adhesives, 258
1. Desensitization, 258
2. Adhesive amalgam restorations, 258
3. Indirect adhesive restorations, 259
Summary, 261

CHAPTER

5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

BASIC CONCEPTS OF ADHESION
The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM;
specification D 907) defines adhesion as "the state in
which two surfaces are held together by interfacial forces
which may consist of valence forces or interlocking forces
The word adhesion comes from the Latin ador both.
haerere ("to stick to"). An adhesive is a material, frequently a viscous fluid, that joins two substrates together
and solidifies, and therefore is able to transfer a load from
one surface to the other. Adhesion or adhesive strength
is the measure of the load-bearing capacity of an adhesive joint . 3 Four different mechanisms of adhesion have
been described 6:
1. Mechanical adhesion-interlocking of the adhesive
with irregularities in the surface of the substrate, or
adherend.
2. Adsorption adhesion-chemical bonding between
the adhesive and the adherend. The forces involved
may be primary (ionic and covalent) or secondary
(hydrogen bonds, dipole interaction, or van der
Waals) valence forces.
3. Diffusion adhesion-interlocking between mobile
molecules, such as the adhesion of two polymers
through diffusion of polymer chain ends across an
interface.
4. Electrostatic adhesion-an electrical double layer at
the interface of a metal with a polymer that is part of
the total bonding mechanism.
Bonding of resins to tooth structure is a result of four
possible mechanisms286:
1. Mechanical-penetration of resin and formation of
resin tags within the tooth surface
2. Diffusion-precipitation of substances on the tooth
surfaces to which resin monomers can bond mechanically or chemically
3. Adsorption-chemical bonding to the inorganic
component (hydroxyapatite) or organic components
( mainly Type I collagen) of tooth structure
4. A combination of the previous three mechanisms
For good adhesion, close contact must exist between
the adhesive and the substrate (enamel or dentin). Furthermore, the surface tension of the adhesive must be
lower than the surface energy of enamel and dentin. A
major problem in bonding resins to tooth structure is
that all methacrylate-based dental resins shrink during
free-radical addition polymerization . 263 Therefore a dental adhesive should provide a strong initial bond to resist the stresses of resin shrinkage.'
Failures of adhesive joints occur in three locations,
which are generally combined when an actual failure
occurs: cohesive failure in the substrate; cohesive failure
within the adhesive; and adhesive failure, or failure at
the interface of substrate and adhesive.

RECENT TRENDS IN RESTORATIVE
DENTISTRY
The introduction of enamel bonding, the increasing
demand for both restorative and nonrestorative esthetic
treatments, and the ubiquity of fluoride have combined
to transform the practice of operative dentistry 328 The
classic concepts of tooth preparation advocated in the
early 1900s have changed drastically over the last 20
years. This transformation in philosophy has resulted in
a more conservative approach to tooth preparation, regarding not only the basic concepts of retention form,
but also the resistance form of the remaining tooth
structure. Bonding techniques allow more conservative
tooth preparations, less reliance on macromechanical retention, and less removal of unsupported enamel.
The availability of new scientific information on the
etiology, diagnosis, and treatment of carious lesions, as
well as the introduction of reliable adhesive restorative
materials, has substantially reduced the need for extensive tooth preparations. Adhesive composite restorations
are used to replace carious dental tissues, to restore fractured teeth, and to replace missing enamel or dentin in
the cervical areas of teeth. With improvements in materials, these indications have progressively shifted from
the anterior segment only to posterior teeth as well. Adhesive restorative techniques are currently used to:
1. Change the shape and the color of anterior teeth.
2. Restore Classes I, II, III, IV, V, and VI carious or traumatic defects.
3. Restore teeth with amalgam using an adhesive
technique.
4. Provide retention for metallic crowns or for porcelainfused-to-metal crowns.
5. Bond all-ceramic restorations (Fig. 5-1).
6. Bond indirect resin-based restorations.

FIG .5-1

A, Twenty-year-old patient with peg lateral incisors.
Patient specifically requested ceramic restorations rather than
direct composite resin. B, Porcelain veneers wrapping around
the proximal surfaces were fabricated and bonded using a totaletch simplified dentin adhesive and a light-activated composite
cement.

CHAPTER 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

A
FIG . 5-4 A and B, Transmission electron micrographs of the enamel-adhesive interface followi ng application of Single Bond (3M ESPE, St. Paul, Minnesota) per manufacturer's instructions.
Acid etching with 35% phosphoric acid (3M ESPE, St. Paul, Minnesota) opened spaces between
enamel prisms (arrows), allowing the permeation of resin monomers between the crystallites
(arrowheads). A, Adhesive; E, enamel.

some studies using lower concentrations have reported
similar adhesion values .118,129,287
An etching time of 60 seconds was originally recommended for permanent enamel using 30% to 40% phosphoric acid. While one study concluded that shorter etch
ti mes resulted in lower bond strengths , 182 other studies
using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) showed that
a 15-second etch resulted in a similar surface roughness
as that provided by a 60-second etch. 18,21,1O6 Other in vitro
studies have demonstrated similar bond strengths and
microleakage for etching times of 15 and 60 seconds. 24,
75,113,277
Clinically, reduced etching times do not appear to
diminish the retention of pit-and-fissure sealants.91,293
FIG . 5-5 Replica of enamel etched with 35% phosphoric acid
( 3M ESPE, St. Paul, Minnesota) Enamel was completely dissolved in 6N HCl for 24 hours. Note the resin extensions that
correspond to the interprismatic spaces (asterisks).

adhesion. Silverstone found that the application of
30% to 40% phosphoric acid resulted in very retentive
enamel surfaces . 282 Concentrations above 40% seem to
dissolve less calcium and result in etch patterns with
poorer definition than when concentrations below 40%
are used. 180 Consequently, most current phosphoric acid
gels have concentrations of 30% to 40%, even though

DENTIN ADHESION
The classic concepts of operative dentistry have been
challenged in the last two decades by the introduction
of new adhesive techniques, first for enamel and then
for dentin. Nevertheless, adhesion to dentin still remains
difficult. Adhesive materials can interact with dentin in
different ways-mechanically, chemically, or both .
2°',330 The importance of micromechanical bonding, similar
to what occurs in enamel bonding, has become accepted
over the last decade. 14,96,329 Researchers now believe that
dentin adhesion relies primarily on the penetration of
adhesive monomers into the filigree of collagen fibers

C H A PT E R 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

FIG . 5-7 Dentin etched with 32% phosphoric acid (Bisco, Inc.,
Schaumburg, Illinois). Col, Collagen exposed by the acid.

FIG 5-6 Scanning electron micrograph of enamel etched with
35% phosphoric acid (Ultradent Products, South Jordan, Utah)
for 2 minutes, denoting a Type I etching pattern.
left exposed by acid etching (Fig. 5-7).
The various
strategies currently used for bonding to dentin are summarized in Table 5-1.

CHALLENGES IN DENTIN BONDING
Substrate. Bonding to enamel is a relatively simple
process, without major technical requirements or difficulties. Bonding to dentin, on the other hand, presents a
much greater challenge. Several factors account for this
difference between enamel and dentin bonding. Whereas
enamel is a highly mineralized tissue composed of more
than 90% (by volume) hydroxyapatite, dentin contains a
substantial proportion of water and organic material, primarily Type I collagen (Fig. 5-8). Dentin also contains a
dense network of tubules that connect the pulp with the
dentin-enamel junction (Fig. 5-9). The tubules are lined
by a cuff of hypermineralized dentin called peritubular
dentin. The less-mineralized intertubular dentin contains
collagen fibrils with the characteristic collagen banding
(Fig. 5-10). The intertubular dentin is penetrated by submicron channels, which allow the passage of tubular liquid and fibers between neighboring tubules, forming intertubular anastomoses.

Dentin is an intrinsically hydrated tissue, penetrated
by a maze of 1 to 2.5 um diameter fluid-filled dentin
tubules. Movement of fluid from the pulp to the dentinenamel junction is a result of a slight but constant pulpal pressures° Pulpal pressure has a magnitude of 25 to
30 mm Hg or 34 to 40 cm H2 0. 312,327
Dentinal tubules enclose cellular extensions from the
odontoblasts and therefore are in direct communication
with the pulp (Fig. 5-11). Inside the tubule lumen, other
fibrous organic structures (the lamina limitans) can be
observed; these substantially decrease the functional radius of the tubule.
The relative area occupied by dentin tubules decreases with increasing distance from the pulp. The
number of tubules decreases from about 45,000 per mm2
close to the pulp, to about 20,000 per mm 2 near the
dentin-enamel junction."' The tubules occupy an area of
only 1% of the total surface near the dentin-enamel junction, whereas they comprise 22% of the surface close to
The average tubule diameter ranges from
the pulp.
0.63 um at the periphery to 2.37 um near the pulp.""
Adhesion can be affected by the remaining dentin
thickness after tooth preparation. Bond strengths are generally less in deep dentin than in superficial dentin.
Nonetheless, some dentin adhesives, such as those based
on the 4-META monomer, do not seem to be affected by
dentin depth .
Whenever tooth structure is prepared with a bur or
other instrument, residual organic and inorganic components form a "smear layer" of debris on the surface . 42,154
The smear layer fills the orifices of dentin tubules (forming smear plugs; see Fig. 5-12) and decreases dentin
permeability by up to 86%. 226 The composition of the
smear layer is basically hydroxyapatite and altered denatured collagen. This altered collagen may even acquire a gelatinized consistency as a result of the friction

C H A PT E R 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

C H A PT E R

5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

Enamel

Dentin

Organic
2%

FIG . 5-8

Composition of enamel and dentin by volume percentage.

FIG . 5-9 Scanning electron micrograph of dentin that was fractured longitudinally.
and heat created by the preparation procedure. Submicron porosity of the smear layer still allows for diffusion
of dentinal fluid .219
The removal of the smear layer and smear plugs with
acidic solutions may result in an increase of the fluid
flow onto the exposed dentin surface. This fluid may interfere with adhesion, because hydrophobic resins do
not adhere to hydrophilic substrates even if resin tags
are formed in the dentin tubules.
Several additional factors affect dentin permeability.
Besides the use of vasoconstrictors in local anesthetics,
which decrease pulpal pressure and fluid flow in the tubules, other factors such as the radius and length of the
tubules, the viscosity of dentin fluid, the pressure gradient, the molecular size of the substances dissolved in the
tubular fluid, and the rate of removal of substances by

FIG. 5-10 A, Scanning electron micrograph of etched dentin
showing exposed collagen fibers. B, A higher magnification
shows the characteristic collagen banding in intertubular coll agen. Superficial collagen was dissolved by collagenase to remove the most superficial collagen fibers that were damaged
by tooth preparation.

CHAPTER 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

Occlusal class I preparation;
C-factor = 5

Proximoocclusal class II
preparation; C-factor = 4

f I G 5-11 Scanning electron micrograph of deep dentin displayi ng an odontoblastic process in a dentinal tubule (asterisk).

Mesioocclusodistal class II
preparation; C-factor = 3

5-13 Schematic representation of the C-factor.

FIG . 5-12 Scanning electron micrograph of a smear plug
blocking the entrance of a dentinal tubule. SP, Smear plug.

All
the blood vessels in the pulp affect permeability.
of these variables make dentin a dynamic substrate and
consequently a very difficult substrate for bonding. 218,286
Stresses at the Resin-Dentin Interface. Composites
shrink as they polymerize, creating stresses of up to 7
MPa within the composite mass, 43,81,82,144 depending on
the configuration of the preparation. When the composite is bonded to one surface only (such as in the case of
a direct facial veneer), stresses within the composite are
relieved by flow from the unbonded surface. However,
stress relief within a three-dimensional bonded restoration is limited by its configuration factor, or C-factor.
For example, in an occlusal preparation, composite is
bonded to five surfaces-mesial, distal, facial, lingual,
and pulpal. The occlusal surface is the only "free" or unrestrained surface (Fig. 5-13). In such a clinical situation,

the ratio between the number of bonded surfaces and
the number of unbonded surfaces is 5, giving the restoration a C-factor of 5. Stress relief is rather limited because flow can occur only from the single free surface.
Unrelieved stresses in the composite may cause internal
bond disruption as well as marginal gaps around
restorations that increase microleakage.234
Immediate bond strengths of approximately 17 MPa
may be necessary to resist the contraction stresses that
develop in the composite during polymerization to prevent marginal debonding. 81,199 Water sorption by the
resin may compensate for the effect of the polymerization shrinkage because the resin may expand and seal
off marginal gaps, but this occurs only over a relatively
long period of time. Water sorption is directly proportional to the resin content.212
Enamel bond strengths are usually sufficient to prevent the formation of marginal gaps by polymerization
contraction stresses. These stresses may, however, be
powerful enough to cause enamel defects at the margins. Extension of the enamel cavosurface bevel may
increase the enamel peripheral seal. 43,137
Each time a restoration is exposed to wide temperature variations in the oral environment (such as drinking coffee and eating ice cream), the restoration undergoes volumetric changes of different magnitude than
those of the tooth structure. This occurs because the linear coefficient of thermal expansion of the composite is
about four times greater than that of the tooth structure.

CHAPTER

5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

Accordingly, microleakage around dentin margins is
potentiated by this discrepancy in linear coefficient of
thermal expansion between the restoration and the
substrate.
DEVELOPMENT OF DENTIN BONDING SYSTEMS
The Beginning. During the 1950s, it was reported
that a resin containing glycerophosphoric acid dimethacrylate (GPDM) could bond to a hydrochloric acidetched dentin surface. (Table 5-2 provides a complete
listing of the chemical names mentioned in this chapter.)
The bond strengths of this primitive adhesion technique
were severely reduced by immersion in water. A few
years before that report, another researcher, Dr. Hagger,
had used the same monomer chemically activated with
sulfinic acid, 185 -186 and that combination would later be
commercially known as Sevriton Cavity Seal (Amalgamated Dental Company, London, England).
First-Generation Dentin Adhesives. The development of the surface-active comonomer NPG - GMA41
was the basis for Cervident (S.S. White, Lakewood, New
Jersey), which is considered a first-generation dentin
bonding system. Theoretically, this comonomer could
chelate with calcium on the tooth surface to generate

List of Chemical Abbreviations

water-resistant chemical bonds of resin to dentinal calcium.', ' However, the in vitro dentin bond strengths of
this material were in the range of only 2 to 3 MPa. 256
Likewise, the in vivo results were discouraging; Cervident had very poor clinical results when used to restore
cervical erosion lesions without mechanical retention. 156
Based on Carbon-13 NMR analysis, it appears that no
ionic bonding actually develops between NPG-GMA
and hydroxyapatite. 344
Second-Generation Dentin Adhesives. In 1978, the
Clearfil Bond System F (Kuraray, Osaka, Japan) was introduced in Japan .256 Generally recognized as the first
product of the second generation of dentin adhesives, it
was a phosphate-ester material (phenyl-P and HEMA in
ethanol). Its mechanism of action was based on the polar interaction between negatively charged phosphate
groups in the resin and the positively charged calcium
in the smear layer .256 The smear layer was the weakest
link in the system because of its relatively loose attachment to the dentin surface. Examination of both sides
of failed bonds revealed the presence of smear layer
debris .8'
Several other phosphate-ester dentin bonding systems were introduced in the early 1980s, including
Scotchbond (3M ESPE, St. Paul, Minnesota), Bondlite
( Kerr Corporation, Orange, California), and Prisma Universal Bond (Dentsply Caulk, Milford, Delaware). These
second-generation dentin bonding systems typically
had in vitro bond strengths of only 1 to 5 MPa, 11,88 which
was considerably below the 10 MPa value estimated as
the threshold value for acceptable in vivo retention." In
addition to the problems caused by the loosely attached
smear layer, these resins were devoid of hydrophilic
groups, and therefore had large contact angles on intrinsically moist surfaces. 16 They did not wet dentin well
nor penetrate the entire depth of the smear layer, and
could not reach the superficial dentin to establish ionic
bonding or resin extensions into the dentinal tubules .88
Whatever bonding did occur was due to interaction
with calcium ions . 62
The in vitro performance of second-generation adhesives after 6 months was unacceptable. 14' The bonding material peeled off the dentin surface after water
storage, indicating that the interface between dentin
and some types of chlorophosphate-ester-based materials was unstable . 94,148 The in vivo performance of
these materials was found to be clinically unacceptable
2 years after placement in cervical tooth preparations
without additional retention such as beveling and acid
etching. 321,329
Third-Generation Dentin Adhesives. The concept of
phosphoric acid-etching of dentin before application of a
phosphate ester-type bonding agent was introduced by
Fusayama and others in 1979. 109 However, because of the
hydrophobic nature of the bonding resin, acid-etching

CHAPTER 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

did not produce a significant improvement in dentin
bond strengths, despite the flow of the resin into the
open dentinal tubules .313 ,326 Furthermore, pulpal inflammatory responses were thought to be triggered by the
application of acid on dentin surfaces, providing another
reason for not using acid .255,292 Nevertheless, continuing
the etched dentin philosophy, Kuraray introduced Clearfil
New Bond in 1984. This new phosphate-based material
contained HEMA and a ten-carbon molecule known as
10-MDP, which includes a long hydrophobic and a short
hydrophilic component.'
Most other third-generation materials were designed
not to remove the entire smear layer, bur rather to modify it and allow penetration of acidic monomers such as
Phenyl-P or PENTA. Despite promising laboratory results .
some of the bonding mechanisms developed never resulted in satisfactory clinical results. For
example, the impregnation of dentin with aminogroup-containing substances was considered an important factor in the establishment of a chemical bond
to collagen.
However, in vivo and in vitro reports
using adhesives that supposedly impregnate dentin
with such amino groups are contradictory. 158,239,335 It is
possible that acidic conditioners /primers that create
precipitates on dentin surfaces, such as the systems
with oxalic acid, may block both dentin tubules and
submicron porosities within the demineralized dentin,
thus preventing resin penetration.
Treatment of the smear layer with acidic primers was
proposed using an aqueous solution of 2.5% malefic acid,
55% HEMA, and a trace of methacrylic acid (Scotchbond
2 [3M ESPE, St. Paul, Minnesota]) . Scotchbond 2 was
the first dentin bonding system to receive "provisional"
and "full acceptance" from the American Dental Association (ADA) in 1987 .129 With this type of smear layer
treatment, manufacturers effectively combined the dentin etching philosophy advocated in Japan with the more
cautious approach advocated in Europe and United
States. The result was preservation of a modified smear
layer with slight demineralization of the underlying intertubular dentin surface. Clinical results were mixed,
with some reports of good performance 329 and some reports of poor performance .320
The removal of the smear layer with chelating agents,
such as EDTA, was recommended in the original Gluma
system (Bayer Dental, Leverkusen, Germany) before the
application of a solution of 5% glutaraldehyde and 35%
HEMA in water. However, the effectiveness of this system may have been impaired by the manufacturer's
questionable recommendation of placing the composite
over uncured unfilled resin .329
Fourth-Generation Dentin Adhesives. Although the
smear layer acts as a "diffusion barrier" that decreases
the permeability of dentin ,226 it can also be considered
an obstacle that must be removed so that resin can be

bonded to the underlying dentin substrate. Based on
that consideration, fourth-generation dentin adhesives
were introduced for use on acid-etched dentin. 92 Removal of the smear layer via acid-etching has led to significant improvements in the in vitro bond strengths of
resins to dentin. 22,161,164,304
Fourth-generation adhesives, such as All-Bond 2
(Bisco, Inc., Schaumburg, Illinois), OptiBond FL (Kerr
Corporation, Orange, California), and Scotchbond MultiPurpose (3M ESPE, St. Paul, Minnesota), are basically
composed of (1) an acid etching gel that is rinsed off;
(2) a solution of primers that are reactive hydrophilic
monomers in ethanol, acetone, and/or water; and (3) an
unfilled or filled fluid bonding agent. The latter generally contains hydrophobic monomers such as bisphenol
glycidyl methacrylate (Bis-GMA), frequently combined
with hydrophilic molecules such as HEMA.
Application of acid to dentin results in partial or total
removal of the smear layer and demineralization of the
underlying dentin.$$ Besides demineralizing intertubular and peritubular dentin, acids open the dentin tubules and expose a dense filigree of collagen fibers (see
Figs. 5-7 and 5-14), thus increasing the microporosity of
the intertubular dentin (Fig. 5-15). 235,329 Dentin is demineralized up to 7.5 um, depending on the type of
acid, application time, and concentration. 11,111,330
Alterations in the mineral content of the substrate also
change the surface free energy of dentin.
The adhesive system must have a low surface tension and the substrate must have a high surface free energy for adequate
interfacial contact.
Substrates are characterized as
having low or high surface energy. Of those materials
used in dentistry, hydroxyapatite and glass-ionomer
cement filler particles are high-energy substrates . 3 Collagen and composite have low energy surfaces . 3 Consequently, dentin consists of two distinct substrates, one of
high-surface energy (hydroxyapatite) and one of low
surface energy (collagen). Thus, after etching with acidic
agents, the dense web of exposed collagen is a lowsurface energy substrate . 93 In fact, there is a correlation
between the ability of an adhesive to spread on the dentin surface and the concentration of calcium on that same
surface.
An increase in the critical surface tension of
dentin by surface-active components (such as primers) is
highly desirable in this case, since a direct correlation between surface energy of dentin and shear bond strengths
has been demonstrated .3o
When primer and bonding resins are applied to
etched dentin, they penetrate the intertubular dentin,
forming a resin-dentin interdiffusion zone, or "hybrid
layer." They also penetrate and polymerize in the open
dentinal tubules, forming resin tags.
Fifth-Generation Dentin Adhesives. The development of dentin bonding systems is continuing at a rapid
pace. In vitro dentin bond strengths have improved so

CHAPTER

5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

Composite
Dentin Adhesive

Hybrid Layer

f I G . 5-14 Bonding of resin to dentin, using a "total-etch" technique.

FIG

5-15 Scanning electron micrograph of dentin that was kept
moist after rinsing off the etchant. The abundant intertubular
porosity will serve as a pathway for the penetration of the
dentin adhesive. T, Dentinal tubule.

much that they approach the values of enamel bonding.
Therefore many current developments are directed at simplification of the bonding procedure.
Nearly all dental materials manufacturers now have a
"one-bottle" adhesive system available on the market.
These combine the primer and bonding agent steps, but
a separate etching step is still needed for the majority of
adhesive systems.
When a commercially available adhesive proves to be
satisfactory under in vitro conditions but takes several
time-consuming steps to be applied in vivo, the clinician usually prefers a material that would be easier to
apply. Manufacturers have been attempting to reduce
the number of steps needed and the corresponding application time, making more user-friendly adhesive systems. Within the last several years, numerous simplified
bonding systems have been released: One-Step (Bisco,
Inc., Schaumburg, Illinois); Prime & Bond, Prime &
Bond 2.1, and Prime & Bond NT (Dentsply Caulk, Milford, Delaware); Prime & Bond 2.0 (Dentsply DeTrey,

CHAPTER 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

Konstanz, Germany); Single Bond (3M ESPE, St. Paul,
Minnesota); OptiBond Solo and OptiBond Solo Plus
( Kerr Corporation, Orange, California); PQ1 (Ultradent
Products, South Jordan, Utah); Syntac Single Component,
Syntac Sprint, and Excite (Ivoclar Vivadent, Schaan, Principality of Liechtenstein); Bondl (Jeneric/Pentron,
Wallingford, Connecticut), One Coat Bond (Coltene/
Whaledent Inc., Mahwah, New Jersey); Gluma One
Bond (Heraeus Kulzer, South Bend, Indiana); and many
others.
Another type of material with durable bonding to
dentin has been marketed since the late 1970s, the glassionomer cements (GIC). These materials set via an acidbase reaction and also are called glass-polyalkenoate cements.' Although beyond the scope of this chapter, it
should be noted that the recent developments in the
area of GICs, namely their chemistry and in vitro bond
strengths, have many characteristics in common with
the development of the fifth-generation dentin adhesive
In fact, some current adhesives (e.g., Sinsystems.
gle Bond and One Coat Bond) contain polyalkenoic acid
derivatives.
Current Strategies. Table 5-3 shows the composition
of some fifth-generation adhesive materials.
Total-Etch Dentin Adhesive Systems. Simultaneous application of an acid to enamel and dentin, known

as the total-etch technique, is the most common strategy
of dentin bonding (see Fig. 5-14). The total-etch technique was initiated in Japan by phosphoric acid etching
of dentin before the application of a phosphate estertype of bonding agent."' In spite of the obvious penetration of this early adhesive into the dentinal tubules,
the application of phosphoric acid on dentin did not result in a significant improvement in bond strengths,
possibly because of the hydrophobic nature of the phosphonated resin. 116 In addition, in the mid-1970s, some
researchers had hypothesized that the application of
acids to dentin might trigger inflammatory pulpal responses.
Based on these concerns, acids were believed to be contraindicated for direct application on
dentin and the total-etch technique did not gain acceptance in Europe or the United States. However, newer
adhesive systems (the fourth- and fifth-generation materials described in the previous section) based on the
total-etch philosophy have proved successful both in
Clinical retention
vitro (Box 5-1) and in vivo .
rates have been reported to be very close to 100%, compared with a second-generation adhesive system having
retention rates in the 50% range . 333 Laboratory bond
strengths usually vary from 17 MPa to 30 MPa, which
are very close to the values commonly obtained on
enamel. 127,135,297

Composition of Several Fifth-Generation Adhesive Materials

Continued

C H A PT E R 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

Composition of Several Fifth-Generation Adhesive Materials-cont'd

Dentin Bond Strengths Associated with
Several Generations of Adhesives

From Asmussen E, Munksgaard EC: Int Dent J 38:97-104, 1988;
Barkmeier WW, Suh Bl, Cooley RL: J Esthet Dent 3:148-153,1991; Eick
JD et al: Quintessence Int 22:967:977, 1991; Gwinnett Al: Am J Dent
5:127-129, 1992; Gwinnett AJ, Kanca J: Am J Dent 5:315-317, 1992;
Gwinnett Al, Kanca J: Am J Dent 5:73-77, 1992; Perdigao J, Baratieri
LN, Lopes M: J Esthet Dent 11:23-35, 1999; Perdigao J et al. J Dent Res
73:44-55, 1994; and Perdigao J, Ramos JC, Lambrechts P: Dent Mater
13:218-227,1997.

Self-Etching Dentin Adhesive Systems. Simultaneous etching of enamel and dentin is the basis for most
of the fourth- and fifth-generation dentin-enamel adhesives in use today (Fig. 5-16). These adhesive are
therefore frequently called "total-etch" systems. The
first systems based on this philosophy included acidic
etchants with a lower concentration than the traditional
30% to 40% phosphoric acid. Some studies have indicated that low-concentration etchants (such as 2.5% nitric, 10% citric, 10% phosphoric, or 10% maleic) are as
effective as 30% to 40% phosphoric acid when applied
to enamel for 15 seconds.' 35,39,120,127,129,135, 271 However,
other studies have shown that such low-concentration
acids have lower enamel bond strengths than conventional 30% to 40% phosphoric acid, when the manufac-

turers' recommended etching times were used .252,298,317,
324
Clinically, the traditional frosted enamel surface often
is not apparent after the application of weaker acids.
Under SEM, enamel etched with 10% maleic acid or
with 10% phosphoric acid for 15 seconds does not acquire the etching pattern characteristic of enamel etched
with 30 % to 40% phosphoric acid for 15 to 30 seconds
(Fig. 5-17). 236 The long-term clinical consequences of
etching enamel with these low-concentration acids are
not yet known. However, a clinical study in Class V
restorations using maleic acid as the etchant demonstrated marginal staining in 10% of the restorations after 1 year and 30% after 3 years' 34 without jeopardizing
the retention rate. The marginal staining was associated
with minor defects on the enamel margins, which may
have been a result of the enamel treatment with the
maleic acid.
More recently, another type of acidic conditioner, the
self-etching primers (SEPs), was introduced in Japan.
These acidic primers include a phosphonated resin
molecule that performs two functions simultaneouslyetching and priming of dentin and enamel. Unlike conventional etchants, self-etching primers are not rinsed
off. The bonding mechanism of SEPs is based on the simultaneous etching and priming of enamel and dentin
without rinsing, forming a continuum in the substrate
and incorporating smear plugs into the resin tags (Fig.
5-18). 232,338 In addition to simplifying the bonding technique, the elimination of rinsing and drying steps reduces the possibility of overwetting or overdrying, which
can have a negative influence in adhesion . 161,164 However, the sealing of enamel margins in vivo may be com-

CHAPTER 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

FIG. 5-16 Bonding to dentin using a self-etching primer.

promised because a perfect marginal integrity is not
achieved .102,210
A clinical study using Clearfil Liner Bond 2
( Kuraray, Osaka, Japan), a self-etching primer, has
demonstrated excellent retention in Class V restorations at three years, but 47% of the restorations had a
score of "bravo" for marginal integrity."' An in vitro
study involving the same adhesive material resulted
in enamel bond strengths statistically similar to those
obtained with the concomitant use of a separate acid
etchant before the application of the primer. 112 However, when the fitting surface was observed under the
SEM, the use of the self-etching primer resulted in a
shallower etching pattern than when a conventional
acid etchant was used. 232 Nevertheless, some in vitro
studies using the same SEP reported bond strengths
of 20 to 28 MPa, which are similar to those bond
strengths obtained with phosphoric acid-etching of
enamel. 19,117,232 These data raise questions about the

FIG 5-17 Scanning electron micrograph of enamel etched
with 10% phosphoric acid (Bisco, Inc., Schaumburg, Illinois) for
15 seconds. Note that the etching pattern is barely discernible,
as opposed to the enamel shown in Figs. 5-3 and 5-6.

CHAPTER 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

A
FIG . 5-18 A, Scanning electron micrograph of a resin-dentin interface formed with Clearfil SE
Bond (Kuraray, Osaka, Japan) upon chemical dissolution of the superficial dentin. A, Adhesive;
D, residual dentin; H, hybrid layer; T, resin tag. B, TEM micrograph of a resin-dentin interface
formed with Clearfil SE Bond (Kuraray, Osaka, Japan) upon EDTA-decalcification and staining
with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. A, Adhesive; D, residual dentin (appears gray because it
was decalcified with EDTA); H, hybrid layer (appears dark because of decalcification followed by
staining); Ts, resin tag that incorporates the smear plug.

definitive need for conventional acid-etching as a separate clinical procedure.
Following the trend toward simplification, two nonrinsing, self-etching materials have been introduced for
use with polyacid-modified composites or compomersPrompt L-Pop (3M ESPE, St. Paul, Minnesota) and NRC
Non-Rinse Conditioner (Dentsply DeTrey, Konstanz,
Germany). The former is a self-etching adhesive, while
the latter is a nonrinsing conditioner combined with a
one-bottle adhesive. Prompt L-Pop, according to its
manufacturer, is an "all-in-one" adhesive system with
etching, priming, and adhesive potentials all in one solution, whereas NRC requires the subsequent application of a separate adhesive, Prime & Bond NT (Dentsply
DeTrey, Konstanz, Germany). The use of NRC instead of
phosphoric acid does not seem to provide any advantage with either composites or compomers. 259 Although
Prompt L-Pop results in enamel bond strengths similar
to those obtained with a separate phosphoric acid etching step, some preliminary in vitro studies suggest that
dentin bond strengths are significantly lower than those
obtained with total-etch, one-bottle adhesives.

ROLE OF THE HYBRID LAYER
The role of the hybrid layer in dentin bonding is somewhat controversial. Data from one in vitro study indi-

cated that resin infiltration or "hybridization" of the
dentinal tubules and intertubular dentin accounts for a
substantial proportion of the bond of resin to dentin."'
On the other hand, data from another study suggested
that the collagen layer offers no quantitative contribution to the interfacial bond strength. '2' Studies of various adhesive systems report different results. A study
with Prime & Bond 2.1 (Dentsply Caulk, Milford, Delaware) indicated that the removal of collagen fibers may
actually increase bond strengths of resin to dentin. 112
Studies with One-Step (Bisco, Inc., Schaumburg, Illinois)
indicated that the hybrid layer might not play any important role in the establishment of bond strengths . 152- 166
For a multibottle adhesive system, All-Bond 2 (Bisco,
Inc., Schaumburg, Illinois), one study reported that the
presence or absence of the hybrid layer did not affect
fracture toughness of resin-dentin interfaces." In the
case of All-Bond 2, a different mechanical behavior of
the adhesive interface would be expected. The Young's
modulus of the adhesive resin is 1.8 GPa, while the
Young's modulus of the All-Bond 2-infiltrated hybrid
layer was estimated to be 3.6 GPa . 261 Dentin has a
Young's modulus in the range of 11 to 18 GPa. 11 Therefore the presence of the collagen layer would presumably allow for the establishment of a stress-relieving
layer at the interface.

C H A PT E R 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

One of the major concerns with laboratory bond
strength testing is the wide range of results obtained for
the same material in different testing sites. It is not uncommon for the same dentin adhesive system to have
bond strengths of 20 MPa in one laboratory, while others report bond strengths below 10 MPa.
There is
also some apprehension that no correlation can be established between bond strength and degree of resin
To illustrate this
penetration into the hybrid layer .
discrepancy, there have been reports of dentin adhesives that do not penetrate the whole depth of the demineralized dentin layer, but still result in bond strengths
above 20 MPa .
In such cases, retention would be
good, in spite of a deficient seal over time, which could
be a triggering factor for nanoleakage phenomena . 261 Intuitively, one would expect an inverse relationship between bond strength and microleakage, but that relationship has not been confirmed.
Clinical studies with dentin adhesive systems are expensive for manufacturers and take at least 18 months.
Cost is a major concern, in part because of the constant
developments in the area of adhesion, making new materials quickly obsolete. There is no financial incentive
for the manufacturer to invest in a clinical study of a
material that may not be on the market by the time the
study is concluded. Consequently, in vitro studies are
still used predominantly by manufacturers to anticipate
the clinical behavior of their materials.
Several factors contribute to the questionable use of in
vitro tests to predict clinical behavior. Among others,
age and storage conditions of the teeth used, dentin
depth, degree of sclerosis, tooth surface to be bonded,
dentin roughness, and type of test used are variables
that frequently are not controllable . 103,217,262,286 According
to some authors, one of the major drawbacks of laboratory bond strength testing is the lack of simulated pulpal pressure to replicate the pulpal pressure that occurs
in vivo. 217 However, other authors have reported that
the pulpal pressure does not significantly interfere with
bond strength results . 214
Recently, a new bond strength testing methodology
was introduced in dental research . 267 This new method,
the microtensile test, allows for the assessment of bond
strengths using bonded surfaces with a cross-sectional
area in the range of only 0.5 to 1.5 mm' (Fig. 5-26). The
new method carries several advantages over conventional shear and tensile bond strengths methods because it:
1. Permits the use of only one tooth to fabricate several
bonded dentin/resin rods.
2. Allows for testing substrates of clinical significance,
such as carious dentin, cervical sclerotic dentin, and
enamel .203
3. Results in fewer defects occurring in the small-area
specimens, as reflected in higher bond strengths . 243

257

4. Allows for the testing of regional differences in bond
strengths within the same tooth . 279

CLINICAL FACTORS IN DENTIN ADHESION
Several clinical factors may influence the success of an
adhesive restoration. First, the mineral content of dentin
increases in different situations, including aged dentin,
dentin in the vicinity of a carious lesion, and dentin exposed to the oral cavity in noncarious cervical lesions, in
which the tubules become obliterated with tricalcium
phosphate crystals. 203,347,348
The dentin that undergoes these compositional changes
is called "sclerotic dentin" and is much more resistant to
acid-etching than "normal" dentin. 331 Consequently, the
penetration of a dentin adhesive is limited . 84-139,331 Additionally, the clinical effectiveness of dentin adhesives is
less in sclerotic cervical lesions than in normal dentin. 141,111 Nevertheless, some specific dentin adhesives
may perform better in sclerotic dentin than in normal
dentin.
Some evidence indicates that masticatory forces may
not only cause cervical noncarious lesions, but also may
contribute to failure of Class V restorations 46,146,147 Bruxism or any other eccentric movement may generate lateral forces that cause concentration of stresses around the
cervical area of the teeth. Although this stress may be of
very low magnitude, the fatigue caused by cyclic stresses
may cause failure of bonds between resin and dentin.
The type of composite used may play an important
role in clinical longevity of Class V restorations .333 Composites shrink as they polymerize, but the amount of
shrinkage depends on the inorganic load of each specific composite. Microfilled composites have a low elastic (or Young's) modulus, which means they are more
able to relieve stresses caused by polymerization or by
tooth flexure. 114,193,333 Materials that have a higher Young's
modulus do not relieve stresses by flow; therefore they
are unable to compensate for the stresses accumulated
during polymerization. These stresses may be subsequently transferred to the adhesive interface and cause
debonding. 333
The low flow capacity of photoinitiated hybrid composites prevents them from flowing to compensate for
the polymerization shrinkage. Polymerization is initiated on the surface of the restoration, close to the light
source, eliminating this surface as a potential stress relief pathway''° Several methods have been advocated to

FIG . 5-26 Preparation of specimens for microtensile bond
strength testing.

CHAPTER

5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

A study using a self-etching primer demonstrated that
dentin bond strengths did not vary from 1 day to 6
months to 1 year in teeth subjected to occlusal function.
It also showed that porosity in the hybrid layer increased
significantly at 1 year, due to loss of resin between the
collagen fibers .264 Since these results were obtained with
a hybrid layer being created by a self-etching primer,
they cannot be generalized to total-etch adhesives. However, they do support the theory that collagen may play
an important role in the strength of the resin-dentin
interface .264
For most dentin adhesives, the ultramorphologic characterization of the transition between the hybrid layer
and the unaffected dentin suggests that there is an abrupt
shift from hybrid tissue to mineralized tissue, without
any empty space or pathway that could result in leakage (Figs. 5-19 and 5-20). The demarcation line seems to
consist of hydroxyapatite crystals embedded in the resin
from the hybrid layer (see Fig. 5-20, B,C).
MOIST VERSUS DRY DENTIN SURFACES
Vital dentin is inherently wet; therefore, complete drying of dentin is difficult to achieve clinically.
Water
has been considered an obstacle for attaining an effective adhesion of resins to dentin. With that in mind, research has shifted toward development of dentin adhesives compatible with humid environments. Most
newer adhesives combine hydrophilic and hydrophobic
monomers in the same bottle, dissolved in an organic
solvent such as ethanol or acetone. The "wet-bonding"
technique prevents the spatial alterations (i.e., collagen
collapse) that occur upon drying demineralized dentin
(Fig. 5-21; compare with Fig. 5-15). Such alterations may
prevent the monomers from penetrating the labyrinth of
nanochannels formed by dissolution of hydroxyapatite
crystals between collagen fibers .
The use of adhesive
systems on moist dentin is made possible by incorporation of the organic solvents acetone or ethanol in the
primers or adhesives. Because the solvent can displace
water from both the dentin surface and the moist collagen network, it promotes the infiltration of resin monomers throughout the nanospaces of the dense collagen
web. The "wet bonding" technique has been shown repeatedly to enhance bond strengths because water preserves the porosity of collagen network available for
monomer interdiffusion. 2,164,165,240 If the dentin surface is
dried with air, the collagen undergoes immediate collapse and prevents resin monomers from penetrating
(see Figs. 5-21 and 5-22). 61,231
The clinician must be aware that pooled moisture
should not remain on the tooth, because excess water
can dilute the primer and render it less effective.309,310 A
glistening hydrated surface is preferred (Fig. 5-23). 302
Many clinicians, however, still dry the tooth preparation
after rinsing away the etching gel to check for the classic etched enamel appearance. Because it is clinically

FIG . 5-19

Scanning electron micrograph of the transition between composite resin (C) adhesive (A), adhesive-hybrid layer
(H), and hybrid layer-dentin.

i mpossible to dry enamel without simultaneously drying dentin, the dentin collagen collapses easily upon airdrying, resulting in the closing of the micropores in the
exposed intertubular collagen .310,311 For acetone-based,
water-free dentin bonding systems, the etched dentin
surface must be rewetted before applying the adhesive.
Rewetting the dried etched dentin with water or with
aqueous rewetting agents has been demonstrated to restore bond strength values and to raise the collapsed
collagen network to a level similar to a "wet bonding"
technique .122,231,311 Some authors have suggested that the
inclusion of water in the composition of some adhesives
may result in rewetting the collagen fibers in areas that
are not left fully moist, thus opening the interfibrillar
spaces to the infiltration of the priming resin . 3'° 332 Therefore the simultaneous inclusion of both an organic solvent and water may be fundamental for the best infiltration of some adhesives into demineralized dentin. This
could result in a less technique-sensitive procedure .253
When etched dentin is dried using an air syringe,
bond strengths decrease substantially, especially for
acetone- and ethanol-based dentin adhesive systems . 161,
231 When water is removed, the elastic characteristics
of collagen may be lost. The collapse of the collagen
fibers upon drying may therefore be a result of the
changes in the molecular arrangement. While in a wet
state, wide gaps separate the collagen molecules from
each other ,269 in a dry state, the molecules are arranged
more compactly. This is because extrafibrillar spaces in
hydrated Type I collagen are filled with water, while
dried collagen has fewer extrafibrillar spaces (see Fig.
5-22) open for the penetration of the monomers included in the adhesive systems."' Water removal also
may permit additional hydrogen bonds to form between collagen molecules that were previously bonded
to water molecules, leaving no interfibrillar space .260
During air-drying, water that occupies the interfibrillar

CHAPTER5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

C
FIG . 5-20 Transmission electron micrograph of a resin-dentin interface formed with the adhesive PQ1 (Ultradent Products, South Jordan, Utah). This specimen was not decalcified or
stained; therefore the unaltered dentin appears darker and the hybrid layer appears lighter.
A, General view, showing the adhesive (A), the hybrid layer (H), a filled resin tag (T, and the
unaffected dentin (D). B, Higher magnification of the transition between the hybrid layer and the
unaffected dentin. Note the small amount of filler in the hybrid layer as small dark dots, which
correspond with the fraction of the filler that fits the size of the space between individual collagen fibers in the etched dentin. C, Higher magnification of the same transition showing a gradual shift from demineralized dentin to unaffected dentin.

C H A PT E R 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

FIG 5-21 Scanning electron micrograph of dentin collagen after
acid etching with 35% phosphoric acid (Ultradent Products, South
Jordan, Utah). Dentin was air-dried. The intertubular porosity disappeared as a consequence of the collapse of the collagen because of evaporation of water that served as a backbone to keep
collagen fibers raised. T, Dentin tubule.

Moist Etched Dentin

Dried Etched Dentin

FIG 5-22 Collapse of etched dentin by air-drying.

spaces previously filled with hydroxyapatite crystals is
lost by evaporation, resulting in a decrease of the volume of the collagen network to approximately one third
of its original volume.
When air-dried demineralized
dentin is rewet with water, the collagen matrix may reexpand and recover its primary dimensions to the levels of the original hydrated state.
This spatial reexpansion occurs because the spaces between fibers are
refilled with water and because Type I collagen itself is
capable of undergoing expansion upon rehydration.
The stiffness of decalcified dentin increases when the
tissue is dehydrated either chemically in water-miscible
solvents, or physically in air. l'8 The increase in stiffness
is reversed when specimens are rehydrated in water.
Therefore, rewetting dentin after air-drying to check for
the enamel frosty aspect may be an acceptable clinical
procedure.

FIG 5-23 Clinical aspect of moist dentin-a glistening appearance without accumulation of water.

CHAPTER

5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

In spite of numerous research papers focused on the
low bond strengths associated with air-dried dentin,
the ultrastructural effects of drying dentin collagen during clinical procedures are not fully understood.
Under the SEM, areas of detachment with incomplete
peritubular hybridization have been observed, along
with deficient penetration of the adhesive into the tubules . 23 ' The adhesive does not seem to penetrate etched
dried intertubular dentin. Under the TEM, collagen fibers coalesce into a structure without individualized interfibrillar spaces. Rewetting reexpands this collapsed
collagen .
Clinically, it is very difficult to either assess or standardize the ideal amount of moisture that should be left
on the dentin surface before the application of the adhesive system. Ideally, water should form a uniform layer
without pooling (overwet) and without dry areas (overdried). Therefore air-drying with an air-water syringe
after rinsing off the etching gel is not recommended because it cannot produce a uniform layer of water on the
surface. A recent study demonstrated that the excess
water after rinsing the etching gel can be removed with
a damp cotton pellet, a disposable brush, or a tissue paper without adversely affecting bond strengths." ,'
ROLE OF PROTEINS IN DENTIN BONDING

Another important issue in dentin bonding is that drying demineralized dentin effectively increases the potential for the subsequent remineralization of that dentin. 151
It may, therefore, be debatable to state that air-drying
has a deleterious effect on long-term stability and durability of dentin-resin bonded interfaces. In fact, no clinical study has ever supported this theory. By becoming
insoluble upon air-drying, collagen may remain less
susceptible to degradation. These exposed collagen fibers might be able to stretch upon tension and provide
an elastic interface. Therefore this is one of numerous
questions to be addressed in the area of dentin adhesion
research. These questions pertain especially to extrapolations obtained from only empirical observations of
bond strength studies.
The partial removal of phosphoproteins from root lesions may enhance the remineralization potential of
those lesions .6' This is important because acid-etching
demineralizes dentin and may leave a layer of exposed
collagen at the bottom of the hybrid layer.
If this
collagen had the ideal environmental conditions for undergoing remineralization, nanoleakage at the bottom
of the hybrid layer might be only an initial temporary
phenomenon that could be arrested by the remineralization process. It has been reported that when demineralized dentin is restored with an adhesive system, the
demineralized layer undergoes remineralization within
4 months . Further studies are warranted to determine the effect of etching on the concentration of noncollagenous proteins and the role that these proteins

have for the stability and durability of the resin-dentin
interfaces.
MICROLEAKAGE

Microleakage is the passage of bacteria and their toxins between restoration margins and tooth preparation
walls. Clinically, microleakage becomes important
when one considers that pulpal irritation is more likely
caused by bacteria than by chemical toxicity of restorative materials .33,53 A n adhesive restoration may not
bond sufficiently to etched dentin to prevent gap formation at margins . 311 The smear layer alone may be a pathway for microleakage through the nanochannels within
its core.
Several studies have demonstrated that the pulpal response to restorative materials is related to the degree of
marginal leakage. 51,52,189,190 Bacteria are able to survive and
proliferate within the fluid-filled marginal gaps under
composite restorations. If the restoration is hermetically
sealed, bacteria will not survive 33,'39
In some cases, pulpal inflammation may occur in the
absence of bacteria. Some bacterial by-products, such
as endotoxins, material from cell walls, and some elements derived from bacterial lipopolysaccharides, can
cause damage to the pulpal tissue. This damage is initiated when leukocytes migrate into the pulp, sometimes as early as 72 hours after the pulp has been challenged. 31,34,48,51,336
A useful property of dentin adhesives that remove the
smear layer is that they may seal the resin-dentin interface and thus prevent exposure of the pulp-dentin complex to bacteria and their toxins. Several in vitro reports
have demonstrated such sealing capacity for total-etch
dentin adhesive systems, 132, but other studies have
shown the occurrence of severe leakage associated with
Recent research also has
similar dentin adhesives.
demonstrated the presence of nanometer-sized pores
underneath or within the resin-dentin interdiffusion
area, despite the presence of gap-free restoration margins. 265,266 Therefore it is debatable whether the absence
of marginal openings will result in a perfect seal between
resin and dentin .266 Bonding the resin to a preparation
with cavosurface margins in enamel is still the best way
to prevent microleakage. 302
The occurrence of gaps at the resin-dentin interface
may not cause immediate debonding of the restoration.
For example, in spite of having demonstrated excellent
marginal seal in vitro, OptiBond (Kerr Corporation,
Orange, California) does not completely seal the interface in vivo. 234 Another report demonstrated 100% clinical retention in sclerotic dentin lesions at 1 year . 26 If a
dentin adhesive system does not adhere intimately to
the dentin substrate, an interfacial gap will eventually
develop and bacteria will be able to penetrate through
this gap. 263 In spite of the probability of incomplete seal
of dentin margins, Class V clinical studies using total-

CHAPTER5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

etch dentin adhesive systems report no findings of pulpal inflammation and/or necrosis .296,329 A plausible explanation for this apparent paradox is that a gap forms
between the hybrid layer and the adhesive resin, leaving the tubules still plugged with resin tags (Fig. 5-24).234
In vitro microleakage studies generally involve Class
V restorations. Specimens usually are thermocycled and
sometimes mechanically loaded to simulate oral conditions.' To quantify microleakage, specimens are immersed in a disclosing solution, such as silver nitrate,
basic fuchsin, or methylene blue. The dye penetrates the
resin-dentin interface wherever gaps occur. After sectioning the teeth, the depth of dye penetration is usually
measured and averaged for the sample size. However,
the relationship between the laboratory testing and the
oral cavity environment is ambiguous at best. Silver nitrate penetration may be a particularly demanding test
of marginal seal because silver ions are smaller than the
bacteria that usually live in the oral cavity241 Some authors have speculated that in vivo leakage is less than
the corresponding dye penetration in vitro.
BIOCOMPATIBILITY
Besides demineralizing the dentin surface, phosphoric
acid removes the smear layer and opens the orifices of
the tubules (see Fig. 5-14).224,330 Despite past apprehension about potential acid penetration into the dentin
tubules and pulp space, the interaction of etchants with
dentin is limited to the superficial 1.9 to 5.8 um.
Thus, it is unlikely that the acid is directly responsible
for any injury to the pulp.
Acid penetration occurs
with
penetration of interprimarily along the tubules,
tubular dentin occurring at a lower rate. 113 The effects of
etchants on dentin are limited by the buffering effect of
hydroxyapatite and other dentin components ,335 including the collagen, which may act as a barrier that reduces
the rate of demineralization .312 Marshall and others have
elucidated the importance of pH regarding the effects of
acids on dentin surfaces. 113 Etching rates increase dramatically with lower pH. Small differences in pH between acidic gels of similar phosphoric acid concentration may be responsible for distinct depths of dentin
demineralization. Manufacturers add thickeners to facilitate handling and other modifiers (such as buffers, surfactants, and colorants) to their etching gels, and these
may contribute to that phenomenon.
Another problem associated with etching dentin with
acids is that current gel etchants are hypertonic.
Application of a hypertonic gel could osmotically draw
fluid from the dentin toward the surface and alter the exposed collagen fibers. Ideally, one would use isotonic acids
as dentin etchants, which have been reported to be well
tolerated both by cell cultures and by monkey pulps.
Several early studies suggested that acidic components included in restorative materials such as silicate
cements would trigger adverse pulp reactions .111,2" For

FIG . 5-24 Interfacial gap showing the top of the hybrid layer (H)
with tag filling the tubular space. A, Adhesive.
several decades, the development of adhesive systems
was limited by the belief that acids applied to dentin
during restorative procedures caused pulpal inflammation. The use of bases and liners was considered essential to protect the pulp from the toxicity of restorative
materials. This concept, however, has changed over the
last 20 years.","," 74
It has been demonstrated that dentin adhesive systems are well tolerated by the pulp-dentin complex in
the absence of bacterial infection. To prevent bacterial
infection, restorations must be hermetically sealed. The
pulp response to dentin adhesives, when teeth are restored in an ideal clinical environment, has been studied using histologic assessment of animal pulps, or in
human premolars extracted for orthodontic reasons,
and in third molars extracted for surgical reasons.
74,107,153,248,285,314,318,343 Some clinical studies also have reported normal pulp responses after the application of
adhesive on the dentin-pulp complex when the pulp is
macroscopically exposed, 141,113 although one report involved only one tooth. Another recent study showed
that the newest dentin adhesive systems are not harmful when applied to exposed pulps. However, several
reports have shown that etching the pulp and applying
a dentin adhesive directly on the exposed pulp tissue
results in severe inflammation and eventual formation
of pulpal abscesses.131,143,215,288 The solution for this disparity would be long-term follow-up of patients in
whom the pulp was treated with acid and adhesive.
Ethical concerns, however, do not allow the routine
use of pulpal etching in patients. It is known, however,
that the thicker is the remaining dentin left between
the pulpal aspect of the preparation and the pulp, the
better is the prognosis for that specific pulp.143 Certainly, the concept of pulp capping remains a controversial topic.
Adverse pulpal reactions after a restorative procedure
may not be caused by the material used in that procedure, but by bacteria remaining in, or penetrating the

CHAPTER 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

preparation. In some cases, adverse reactions are caused
by a combination of factors, such as the following:
1. Bacterial invasion of the pulp, either from the tooth
preparation or from an existing carious lesion
2. Bacterial penetration into the pulp caused by a faulty
restoration
3. Pressure gradient caused by excessive desiccation or
by excessive pressure during cementation32,47
4. Traumatic injuries
5. latrogenic tooth preparation-excessive pressure,
heat, or friction .32
6. Stress derived from polymerization contraction of
composites and adhesives.
An important note on the biocompatibility issue is the importance of tooth preparations with enamel peripheries.
When all margins are in enamel, polymerization shrinkage stresses at the interface are counteracted by strong
enamel adhesion. Thus, marginal gaps are less likely to
form, and the restoration is sealed against bacteria.

RELEVANCE OF IN VITRO STUDIES
The laboratory parameter most often measured in dentin
adhesion is shear bond strength. Flat dentin surfaces are
prepared in extracted human or bovine teeth, the adhesive system is applied, and a composite post is bonded
over the adhesive. A shear force is then applied at the
resin-dentin interface, most often using a knife-edge
probe (Fig. 5-25). After testing, the specimens are usually evaluated to determine the nature of the fracturesadhesive, cohesive, or mixed.

The number of cohesive failures in the dentinal substrate increases with increasing bond strengths . 141 There
may be, however, some misinterpretation of cohesive
failures in dentin.'° For example, a mean bond strength
of 9.2 MPa has been reported to result in 82% of cohesive failures in dentin'241 while the intrinsic strength of
dentin has been reported to be in the range of 28.4 to
45.9 MPa. 132 Cohesive failures of dentin obtained during
bond strength testing may result from anomalous stress
distribution .223
A major disadvantage of shear bond strength testing
is that it does not consider the three-dimensional geometry of tooth preparations and consequent variations in
polymerization shrinkage vectors .103,294 Additionally, it
may not represent a true representation of a shear force.
In vitro shear bond strength studies are therefore rather
i mprecise methods to evaluate the efficacy of dentin adhesive systems .
Although these studies are only rough categorizing
tools for evaluating the relative efficacy of bonding materials, they are, nevertheless, excellent tools for screening new materials and for comparing the same parameter among different adhesive systems. 106 The results of
in vitro bond strength tests have been validated with
clinical results because improvements seen in the laboratory environment from the second-generation to the
fourth-generation adhesive systems have been confirmed
in clinical trials .329,333 Additionally, the combination of
bond strength data with ultramorphologic analysis of
adhesive interfaces supplies much useful information
concerning the interaction of dentin bonding systems
with dental substrates . 168

FIG 5-25 Schematic representation of shear-bond strength testing.

CHAPTER

5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

improve the flow capacity of composites used in Class 11
tooth preparations. One of those methods is the use of
a flowable composite between the composite and the
tooth wall. Conceptually, this flowable low-modulus
composite would serve as a shock absorber' 03,104 and
simultaneously protect the interface against fatigue
stresses .169 Low-viscosity resins have been reported to
decrease microleakage when used as part of dentin adhesive systems.
However, the use of flowable composites as the gingival increment of Class II preparations has not been proven effective clinically.
NEW CLINICAL INDICATIONS
FOR DENTIN ADHESIVES

Desensitization. Dentin hypersensitivity is a common clinical condition that is difficult to treat because
the treatment outcome is not consistently successful.
Most authorities agree that the hydrodynamic theory"
best explains dentin hypersensitivity. The equivalency
of various hydrodynamic stimuli has been evaluated
from measurements of the fluid movement induced in
vitro and relating this to the hydraulic conductance of
the same dentin specimen."'
Patients may complain of discomfort when teeth are
subjected to temperature changes, osmotic gradients
such as those caused by sweet or salty foods, or even
tactile stimuli. It has been calculated that 40 million
Americans may have some degree of dentin hypersensitivity at some point in their life '272 while in other regions of the world the prevalence of dentin sensitivity
may approach 50% of the population. 112,200 The cervical
area of teeth is the most common site of hypersensitivity. Cervical hypersensitivity may be caused not only by
chemical erosion, but also by mechanical abrasion or
even occlusal stresses.
Theories about the transmission of pain stimuli in
dentin sensitivity suggest that pain is amplified when
the dentinal tubules are open to the oral cavity.
Therefore dentin hypersensitivity can be a major problem for periodontal patients, who frequently have gingival recession and exposed root surfaces. The relationship between dentin hypersensitivity and the patency of
dentin tubules in vivo has been established"' and occlusion of the tubules seems to decrease that sensitivity. 171
It also has been suggested that the incorrect manipulation of some adhesive materials, namely those with acetone, may actually trigger postoperative sensitivity 309,310
Clinicians have used many materials and techniques
to treat dentin hypersensitivity, including specific dentifrices, CO2 laser irradiation, dentin adhesives, antibacterial agents, aldehydes, resin suspensions, fluoride rinses,
fluoride varnishes, calcium phosphate, potassium nitrate, and oxalates, among others.60,150,197,247,315,342,346,349
More recently, dentin desensitizing solutions also
have been used under amalgam restorations and
crowns to prevent postoperative sensitivity' The use

of a dentin desensitizer before cementing full-coverage
crowns is supported by studies that showed that
dentin-desensitizing solutions do not interfere with
crown retention, regardless of the type of luting cement
used. 69,253,301
The use of dentin adhesives to treat hypersensitive
root surfaces has gained popularity over the last few
years." ," Reductions in sensitivity may result from formation of resin tags and a hybrid layer when a dentin adhesive is used .202 The precipitation of proteins from the
dentinal fluid in the tubules also may account for the efficacy of desensitizing solutions. However, other factors may be involved in the action of dentin desensitizing
solutions .2°5 ,339 For example, the primers of the multibottle adhesive system All-Bond 2 (Bisco, Inc., Schaumburg,
Illinois) have a desensitizing effect, even without consistent resin tag formation . In a clinical study using the
primer of the original Gluma adhesive system (an aqueous solution of 5% glutaraldehyde and 35% HEMA, currently marketed as Gluma Desensitizer [Heraeus Kulzer,
South Bend, Indiana]), the desensitizing solution was
applied to crown preparations. 99 The authors concluded
that Gluma primer reduced dentin sensitivity through a
protein denaturation process with concomitant changes
in dentin permeability. This theory recently has been
supported by studies using confocal microscopy, which
found the formation of transversal septa occluding the
dentinal tubules following application of Gluma Desensitizer. However, another study found that Gluma
Desensitizer did not have any effect on dentin permeability in vitro .
Adhesive Amalgam Restorations. Marginal discoloration, recurrent caries lesions, and postoperative sensitivity are the most frequent consequences of the penetration of oral fluids and bacteria through gaps at the
dentin-resin interface towards the pulp., 36
Delayed interfacial marginal leakage occurs at the
amalgam-preparation interface.' Corrosion products from
amalgam seal the interface after a few months; however,
this process may take more than 6 months for copperrich amalgam alloys such as the spherical and blended
amalgam alloys currently used in dentistry
Highcopper amalgam alloys undergo a much slower corrosion process than conventional amalgam alloys because
of the elimination of the y2 phase . 2' To overcome the
inevitable marginal microleakage, dentin adhesive systems have been used both under mercury-based amalgam restorations and under gallium-based amalgam restorations.","' It is now accepted that the use of adhesive
systems beneath amalgam restorations reduces or prevents marginal leakage both in vivo and in vitro
and improves marginal integrity of the restoration 311
when compared to the use of a copal varnish. Additionally, dentin adhesives reinforce the amalgam restoration
margins, making the cavosurface angle less susceptible
to acidic demineralization in vitro . 245 However, despite

CHAPTER

5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

anecdotal evidence to the contrary, postoperative sensitivity may be one clinical parameter that dentin adhesives do not improve over the use of copal varnishes."', "'
Several laboratory and clinical studies have shown
that dentin adhesive systems such as All-Bond 2 (Bisco,
Inc., Schaumburg, Illinois), Amalgambond Plus (Parkell,
Farmingdale, New York), Panavia (Kuraray, Osaka,
Japan), and Scotchbond Multi-Purpose Plus (3M ESPE,
St. Paul, Minnesota) can be used to bond amalgam
restorations .
The attachment mechanism between
the adhesive and the amalgam is not fully understood,
but it may be micromechanical entanglement of the uncured adhesive material with the setting amalgam mix
during condensation of the amalgam (Fig. 5-27). This
bonding mechanism actually may depend on the type
of amalgam used; for example, spherical amalgam alloys typically have higher bond strengths than dispersedphase or admixed amalgam alloys . 319
Shear bond strengths between amalgam and dentin
were in the range of 3 to 5 MPa in the late 1980s and
early 199
However, recent studies have
demonstrated that some current adhesive systems proAs
vide bond strengths in the range of 10 to 14 MPa.
a safety precaution, primary mechanical retention features are still recommended when an adhesive system is
used with amalgam.
Some studies also suggest that the use of dual-cured
filled liners may be beneficial for bonding amalgam to
dentin. 68,133,249 The use of a self-cured filled adhesive liner
has been shown to be as valuable under amalgam restorations as under composite restorations 209 The additional adhesive liner may provide an increased retention
to adhesive amalgam restorations, therefore allowing for
preparations with lower demand for additional retention
features such as dovetails, slots, holes, or even pins. 64
Moreover, marginal leakage has been shown to decrease
when thick dual-cured or self-cured liners are used.
Another advantage from the use of dentin adhesives
under amalgam restorations is that the residual tooth
structure becomes more resistant to fracture than when
teeth are restored with a copal varnish and amalgam. 208,244
This reinforcing effect may not be as evident for wide
tooth preparations as for narrow tooth preparations . 45
Light-curing of the resin from the external tooth surface after condensing the amalgam into the preparation
recently has been evaluated in vitro for three dual-cured
adhesive systems . 250 The rationale behind the use of lightcuring through the tooth walls was that some dualcured adhesive systems might not be able to polymerize
completely underneath the amalgam restoration. However, the mean bond strengths obtained for the groups
in which the extra light-curing period was used were
statistically similar to the mean bond strengths obtained
when the dual-cured adhesive systems were used as per
manufacturers' instructions (i.e., without additional
light curing).

Dentin adhesive systems also are used to bond fresh
amalgam to existing amalgam restorations in repair
procedures. The prognosis of this type of procedure is,
however, unpredictable and can be unsuccessful.
174,257
The interfacial failure between fresh amalgam and
old amalgam may be a result of the lack of micromechanical retention in the "old" amalgam restoration surface. Therefore dentin adhesive systems are not recommended for amalgam repair.
I ndirect Adhesive Restorations. Current dentin adhesive systems are considered as universal adhesives
because they bond to various substrates besides dentin.
Recent developments in adhesion technology
have led to new indications for bonding to the tooth
structure, such as indirect composite and ceramic restorations (crowns, inlays, onlays, and veneers). The use
of a universal adhesive system in conjunction with a
resin cement provides durable bonding of indirect
restorations to tooth structure . 51
Ceramic restorations (with the exception of aluminouscore porcelains such as In-Ceram High Strength Ceramic [Vita Zahnfabrik/Vident, Bad Sackingen, Germany]) must be etched internally with 6% to 10% hydrofluoric acid (HF) for 1 to 2 minutes to create retentive
microporosities (Fig. 5-28) analogous to those that occur
in enamel upon etching with phosphoric acid. HF must
be rinsed off carefully with running water for at least
2 minutes. Some clinicians use sandblasting with aluminum oxide particles in the internal surface of the restoration. However, mean bond strengths decrease when
HF-etching is not used . 215 After rinsing off the HF and
drying with an air syringe, a silane coupling agent is
applied on the etched porcelain surface and air-dried.
The coupling agent acts as a primer because it modifies the surface characteristics of etched porcelain. Because etched porcelain is an inorganic substrate, the
coupling agent makes this surface more receptive to
organic materials, the adhesive system, and composite

FIG 5-27

Scanning electron micrograph of amalgam-resindentin interface showing the amalgam (Am), the adhesive (A),
and resin tags (R).

CHAPTER5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

A
FIG . 5-28 Scanning electron micrograph of Vita (Vita Zahnfabrik/Vident, Bad Sackingen, Germany)
dental ceramic etched with 9.6% hydrofluoric acid for 2 minutes. A, Top view. B, Lateral view.

resin cement. Silane coupling agents were introduced in
1952 to bond organic with inorganic substances . 3 ' In
1962 this technology was transferred to dentistry to
couple a Bis-GMA resin with inorganic particles to form
a composite." The use of silanes may actually increase
the bond between composite and porcelain in the range
of 25%. 83,204,278 Most luting resins are dual-cured (they
polymerize both chemically and by light activation).
However, some materials marketed as "dual-cure" do
not polymerize efficiently in the absence of a curing
light. 78,140,242
Other circumstances exist in which porcelain bonding
is of extreme importance. Fracture of all-ceramic or
metal-ceramic restorations is not uncommon. It becomes very frustrating for the clinician who must decide whether to repair or to replace the fractured restoration. 157 Several methods for repairing porcelain
restorations have been advocated. The creation of surface roughness (e.g., with a coarse diamond bur) on the
porcelain surface allows its repair with a universal adhesive and composite.
Sandblasting with aluminum oxide particles is another method for roughening
the porcelain surface for repair . However, the use of
HF on the roughened porcelain surface is still necessary
to create deep microretentive porosities and facilitate
mechanical retention. 174,278,295 If the internal surface of
the porcelain restoration is treated adequately, the bond
strengths between composite and porcelain surface often exceed 25 MPa, which has been considered a predictable value for clinical success . 9,173,283,289
Indirect composite restorations also may be bonded
to etched dental substrates using a universal adhesive
system and a resin luting cement. One of the great advantages of indirect composite restorations is that polymerization shrinkage occurs outside the mouth. Additionally, the degree of monomer conversion is higher for
indirect resin-based restorations .155,160,177,340,311 However,
this increased level of double bond conversion results in

FIG . 5-29 Scanning electron micrograph of Rexillium III (Jeneric/
Pentron, Wallingford, Connecticut) after electrochemical etching
with 0.5N nitric acid for 5 minutes. (Special thanks to Dr. Glen
I mamura for preparing this specimen.)

only a small amount of monomer double bonds on the
internal surface of the indirect composite restoration,
therefore decreasing the potential for bonding with the
adhesive system and with the composite luting cement.
To overcome this unsuitable bonding surface, the composite may be treated with surface activators to reestablish the surface energy (Composite Activator [Bisco,
Inc., Schaumburg, Illinois], Activator-ArtGlass [Heraeus
Kulzer, South Bend, Indiana]). Another alternative is
sandblasting the bonding surface of the indirect restoration to expose an internal area where more double bonds
may be present .40 HF is contraindicated for treating indirect composites because it softens some composite
materials . 300
Cast metal restorations traditionally were cemented
with zinc phosphate or polycarboxylate cements. With
the advent of new adhesive techniques, the treatment of
the internal surface of the metal restoration with acids
(Fig. 5-29), sandblasting, or tin-plating (for gold) has re-

CHAPTER 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

282. Silverstone LM et al: Variation in the pattern of acid etching
of human dental enamel examined by scanning electron microscopy, Caries Res 9:373-387,1975.
283. Simonsen RJ, Calamia JR: Tensile bond strength of etched
porcelain (abstract 1154), J Dent Res 62:297, 1983.
284. Simpson MD et al: Effects of aluminum oxalate/glycine pretretament solutions on dentin permeability, Am J Dent 5:
324-328,1992.
285. Snuggs HM et al: Pulpal healing and dentinal bridge formation in an acidic environment, Quintessence Int 24:501-509,
1993.
286. Soderholm K-JM: Correlation of in vivo and in vitro performance of adhesive restorative materials: a report of the ASC
MD156 Task Group on test methods for the adhesion of
restorative materials, Dent Mater 7:74-83, 1991.
287. Soetopo, Beech DR, Hardwick JL: Mechanism of adhesion
of polymers to acid-etched enamel: effect of acid concentration and washing on bond strength, J Oral Rehabil 5:69-80,
1978.
288. Souza Costa CA, Hebling J, Hanks CT: Current status of
pulp capping with dentin adhesive systems: a review, Dent
Mater 16:188-197, 2000.
289. Stangel I, Nathanson D, Hsu CS: Shear bond strength of the
composite bond to etched porcelain, J Dent Res 66:14601465,1987.
290. Staninec M: Retention of amalgam restorations: undercuts
versus bonding, Quintessence Int 20:347-351, 1989.
291. Staninec M, Kawakami M: Adhesion and microleakage tests
of a new dentin bonding system, Dent Mater 9:204-208.
1993.
292. Stanley HR, Going RE, Chauncey HH: Human pulp response to acid pretreatment of dentin and to composite
restoration, JADA 91:817-825, 1975.
293. Stephen KW et al: Retention of a filled fissure sealant using
reduced etch time, Br Dent J 153:232-233, 1982.
294. Sudsangiam S, van Noort R: Do dentin bond strength tests
serve a useful purpose? JAdhes Dent 1:57-67, 1999.
295. Suliman AA, Swift EJ, Perdigao J: Effects of surface treatment and bonding agents on bond strength of composite to
porcelain, J Prosthet Dent 70:118-120, 1993.
296. Suzuki T, Finger WJ: Dentin adhesives: site of dentin vs.
bonding of composite resins, Dent Mater 4:379-383, 1988.
297. Swift EJ, Bayne SC: Shear bond strength of a new one-bottle
dentin adhesive, Am J Dent 10:184-188,1997.
298. Swift EJ, Cloe BC: Shear bond strengths of new enamel
etchants, Am J Dent 6:162-164, 1993.
299. Swift EJ et al: Prevention of root surface caries using a dental adhesive, JADA 125:571-576, 1994.
300. Swift EJ, LeValley BD, Boyer DB: Evaluation of new methods
for composite repair, Dent Mater 8:362-365, 1992.
301. Swift EJ, Lloyd AH, Felton DA: The effect of resin desensitizing agents on crown retention, J Am Dent Assoc 128:195200, 1997.
302. Swift EJ, Perdigao J, Heymann HO: Bonding to enamel and
dentin: a brief history and state of the art, 1995, Quintessence
Int 26:95-110, 1995.
303. Swift EJ, Perdigao J, Heymann HO: Enamel bond strengths
of"one -bottle"adhesives, Pediatr Dent 20:259-262, 1998.
304. Swift EJ, Triolo PT: Bond strengths of Scotchbond Multi-Purpose to moist dentin and enamel, Am J Dent 5:318-320,1992.
305. Tam LE, Pilliar RM: Fracture surface characterization of
dentin-bonded interfacial fracture toughness specimens,
J Dent Res 73:607-619, 1994.

306. Tao L, Tagami J, Pashley DH: Pulpal pressure and bond
strengths of Superbond and Gluma, Am j Dent 4:73-76,1991.
307. Tarim B et al: Marginal integrity of bonded amalgam
restorations, Am J Dent 9:72-76, 1996.
308. Tatsumi T et al: Remineralization of etched dentin, J Prosthet
Dent 67:617-620, 1992.
309. Tay FR et al: Resin permeation into acid-conditioned, moist,
and dry dentin: a paradigm using water-free adhesive
primers, J Dent Res 75:1034-1044, 1996.
310. Tay FR, Gwinnett AJ, Wei SHY: Micromorphological spectrum from overdrying to overwetting acid-conditioned dentin
in water-free, acetone-based, single-bottle primer/adhesives,
Dent Mater 12:236-244, 1996.
311. Tay FR, Gwinnett AJ, Wei SHY: Ultrastructure of the resindentin interface following reversible and irreversible rewetting, Am J Dent 10:77-82,1997.
312. Terkla LG et al: Testing sealing properties of restorative materials against moist dentin, J Dent Res 66:1758-1764, 1987.
313. Torney D: The retentive ability of acid-etched dentin, J Prosthet Dent 39:169-172, 1978.
314. Torstenson B, Hordenvall KJ, Brdnnstrom M: Pulpal reaction
and microorganisms under Clearfil Composite Resin in deep
cavities with acid etched dentin, Swed Dent j 6:167-176,1982.
315. Touyz LZ, Stern J: Hypersensitive dentinal pain attenuation
with potassium nitrate, Gen Dent 47:42-45, 1999.
316. Triana R et al: Dentin bond strength of fluoride-releasing
materials, Am J Dent 7:252-254, 1994.
317. Triolo PT et al: Effect of etching time on enamel bond
strengths, Am J Dent 6:302-304, 1993.
318. TsunedaY et al: A histopathological study of direct pulp capping with adhesive resins, Oper Dent 20:223-229, 1995.
319. Turner EW, St Germain HA, Meiers JC: Microleakage of
dentin-amalgam bonding agents, Am J Dent 8:191-196,1995.
320. Tyas MJ, Chandler JE: One-year clinical evaluation of three
dentine bonding agents, Austr Dent J 38:294-298, 1993.
321. Tyas MJ et al: Clinical evaluation of Scotchbond: three-year
results, Austr Dent J 34:277-279, 1989.
322. Uno S, Finger WJ: Effects of acidic conditioners on dentine
demineralization and dimension of hybrid layers, J Dent 24:
211-216,1996.
323. van der Graaf ER, ten Bosch JJ: Changes in dimension and
weight of human dentine after different drying procedures
and during subsequent rehydration, Arch Oral Bio138:97-99,
1993.
324. van derVyver PJ, de Wet FA, Jansen van Rensburg JM: Bondi ng of composite resin using different enamel etchants,
J Dent Assoc South Africa 52:169-172, 1997.
325. van Dijken JWV: Clinical evaluation of three adhesive systems
in class V non-carious lesions, Dent Mater 16:285-291, 2000.
326. van Dijken JWV, Horstedt P: In vivo adaptation of restorative materials to dentin, J Prosthet Dent 56:677-681, 1986.
327. van Hassel HJ: Physiology of the human dental pulp, Oral
Surg Oral Med Oral Patho132:126-134, 1971.
328. van Meerbeek B et al: The clinical performance of dentin adhesives, J Dent 26:1-20, 1998.
329. van Meerbeek B et al: Clinical status of ten adhesive systems, J Dent Res 73:1690-1702, 1994.
330. van Meerbeek B et al: Morphological aspects of the resindentin interdiffusion zone with different dentin adhesive
systems, J Dent Res 71:1530-1540, 1992.
331. van Meerbeek B et al: Morphological characterization of the
interface between resin and sclerotic dentine, J Dent 22:141146,1994.

C H A PT E R 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

sulted in high bond strengths between metal and tooth
structure using resin cements . 36,77

SUMMARY
Reliable bonding of resins to enamel and dentin has revolutionized the practice of operative dentistry. Improvements in dentin bonding materials and techniques are
likely to continue. However, even as the materials themselves become better and easier to use, proper attention
to technique and a good understanding of the bonding
process remain essential for clinical success.
REFERENCES
1. Aasen SM, Ario PD: Bonding systems: a comparison of
maleic and phosphoric acids (abstract 269), J Dent Res 72:
137, 1993.
2. Abdalla AI, Garcfa-Godoy F: Bond strengths of resin-modified
glass ionomers and polyacid-modified resin composites to
dentin, Am J Dent 10:291-294, 1997.
3. Akinmade AO, Nicholson JW: Glass-ionomer cements as
adhesives. I: Fundamental aspects and their clinical relevance, J Mater Sci: Materials in Medicine 4:95-101, 1993.
4. Albers HE Dentin-resin bonding, ADEPT Report 1:33-42,
1990.
5. Alexieva C: Character of the hard tooth tissue-polymer
bond. II: Study of the interaction of human tooth enamel
and dentin with N-phenylglycine-glycidyl methacrylate
adduct, J Dent Res 58:1884-1886, 1979.
6. Allen KW: Theories of adhesion. In Packham DE, editor:
Handbook of adhesion, Essex, 1992, Longman Scientific &
Technical.
7. al-Salehi SK Burke FJ: Methods used in dentin bonding
tests: an analysis of 50 investigations on bond strength,
Quintessence Int 28:717-723, 1997.
8. Andrews JT, Hembree JH: Marginal leakage of amalgam alloys with high content of copper: a laboratory study, Oper
Dent 5:7-10, 1980.
9. Appeldoorn RE, Wilwerding TM, Barkmeier WW: Bond
strength of composite resin to porcelain with newer generation porcelain repair systems, J Prosthet Dent 70:6-11, 1993.
10. Armstrong SR Boyer DB, Keller JC: Microtensile bond
strength testing and failure analysis of two dentin adhesives, Dent Mater 14:44-50, 1998.
11. Armstrong SR et al: Effect of hybrid layer on fracture toughness of adhesively bonded dentin-resin composite joint,
Dent Mater 14:91-98, 1998.
12. Asmussen E: Clinical relevance of physical, chemical, and
bonding properties of composite resins, Oper Dent 10:61-73,
1985.
13. Asmussen E, Bowen RL: Adhesion to dentin mediated by
Gluma: effect of pretreatment with various amino acids,
Scand J Dent Res 95:521-525, 1987.
14. Asmussen E, Hansen EK, Peutzfeldt A: Influence of the solubility parameter of intermediary resin on the effectiveness
of the Gluma bonding system, J Dent Res 70:1290-1293,1991.
15. Asmussen E, Munksgaard EC: Bonding of restorative materials to dentine: status of dentine adhesives and impact on
cavity design and filling techniques, Int Dent J 38:97-104,1988.
16. Baier RE: Principles of adhesion, Oper Dent 5(suppl):1-9,
1992
17. Barkmeier WW, Cooley RL: Laboratory evaluation of adhesive systems, Oper Dent 5(suppl):50-61, 1992.

18. Barkmeier WW, Gwinnett AJ, Shaffer SE: Effects of enamel
etching on bond strength and morphology, J Clin Orthodont
19:36-38,1985.
19. Barkmeier WW, Los SA, Triolo PT Jr: Bond strengths and SEM
evaluation of Clearfil Liner Bond 2, Am J Dent 8:289-293,1995.
20. Barkmeier WW, Menis DL, Barnes DM: Bond strength of a
veneering porcelain using newer generation adhesive systems, Pract Periodont Aesthet Dent 5:50-55, 1993.
21. Barkmeier WW, Shaffer SE, Gwinnett AJ: Effects of 15 vs 60
second enamel acid conditioning on adhesion and morphology, Oper Dent 11:111-116,1986.
22. Barkmeier WW, Suh BI, Cooley RL: Shear bond strength to
dentin and Ni-Cr-Be alloy with the All-Bond universal adhesive system, J Esthet Dent 3:148-153, 1991.
23. Barnes DM, Thompson VP, Blank LW, McDonald NJ: Microleakage of Class 5 composite resin restorations: a comparison between in vivo and in vitro, Oper Dent 18:237-245,
1993.
24. Bastos PAM et al: Effect of etch duration on the shear bond
strength of a microfill composite resin to enamel, Am J Dent
1:151-157,1988.
25. Bauer JG, Henson JL: Microleakage: a measure of the performance of direct filling materials, Oper Dent 9:2-9, 1984.
26. Bayne SC et al: One-year clinical evaluation of stress-breaking
class V DBA design, Trans Acad Dent Mater 7:91, 1994.
27. Belcher MA, Stewart GP: Two-year clinical evaluation of an
amalgam adhesive, DADA 128:309-314, 1997.
28. Ben-Amar A, Cardash HS, Judes H: The sealing of the
tooth/amalgam interface by corrosion products, J Oral Rehabil
22:101-104,1995.
29. Ben-Amar A et al: Long term sealing properties of Amalgambond under amalgam restorations, Am J Dent 7:141-143,
1994.
30. Benediktsson S et al: Critical surface tension of wetting of
dentin (abstract 777), J Dent Res 70:362, 1987.
31. Bergenholtz G: Effect of bacterial products on inflammatory
reactions in dental pulp, Scand J Dent Res 85:122-129, 1977.
32. Bergenholtz G: Iatrogenic injury to the pulp in dental procedures: aspects of pathogenesis, management and preventive measures, Int Dent J 41:99-110, 1991.
33. Bergenholtz G et al: Bacterial leakage around dental restorations its effect on the dental pulp, J Oral Pathol 11:439-450,
1982.
34. Bergenholtz G, Warfvinge J: Migration of leukocytes in dental pulp in response to plaque bacteria, Scand J Dent Res 90:
354-362,1982.
35. Berry TG et al: Effectiveness of nitric-NPG as a conditioning
agent for enamel, Am J Dent 3:59-62, 1990.
36. Bertolotti RL, Lacy AM, Watanabe LG: Adhesive monomers
for porcelain repair, Int J Prosthodont 2:483-489, 1989.
37. Bjorksten J,Yaeger LL: Vinyl silane size for glass fabric, Mod
Plast 2(29):124, 128, 1952.
38. Black GV: A work on operative dentistry in two volumes, ed 3,
Chicago, 1917, Medico-Dental Publishing.
39. Blosser RL: Time dependence of 2.5% nitric acid solution as
an etchant on human dentin and enamel, Dent Mater 6:83-87,
1990.
40. Bouschlicher MR, Reinhardt JW, Vargas MA: Surface treatment for resin composite repair, Am J Dent 10:279-283,1997.
41. Bowen RL: Adhesive bonding of various materials to hard
tooth tissues. II: Bonding to dentin promoted by a surfaceactive comonomer, J Dent Res 44:895-902, 1965.
42. Bowen RL et al: Smear layer: removal and bonding considerations, Oper Dent 3(suppl):30-34, 1984

CHAPTER 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

43. Bowen RL, Nemoto K, Rapson JE: Adhesive bonding of various materials to hard tooth tissue: forces developing in
composite materials during hardening, JADA 106:475-477,
1983.
44. Bowen RL, Rodriguez MS: Tensile strength and modulus of
elasticity of tooth structure and several restorative materials,
JADA 64:378-387,1962.
45. Boyer DB, Roth L: Fracture resistance of teeth with bonded
amalgams, Am J Dent 7:91-94, 1994.
46. Braem M et al: Stiffness increase during the setting of dental composite resins, J Dent Res 66:1713-1716, 1987.
47. Brdnnstrhm M: The effect of dentin desiccation and aspirated odontoblasts on the pulp, J Prosthet Dent 20:165-171,
1968.
48. Brdnnstrom M: Communication between the oral cavity and
the dental pulp associated with restorative treatment, Oper
Dent 9:57-68, 1984.
49. Brdnnstrom M, Linden LA, Astrom A: The hydrodynamics
of the dental tubule and of pulp fluid: a discussion of its
significance in relation to dentinal sensitivity, Caries Res 1:
310-317,1967.
50. Brdnnstrom M, Linden LA, Johnson G: Movement of dentinal and pulpal fluid caused by clinical procedures, J Dent Res
47:679-682, 1968.
51. Brdnnstrom M, Nordenvall J: Bacterial penetration, pulpal
reaction and the inner surface of Concise Enamel Bond:
composite fillings in etched and unetched cavities, J Dent Res
57:3-10,1978.
52. Brdnnstrom M, Nyborg H: Cavity treatment with a microbicidal fluoride solution: growth of bacteria and effect on the
pulp, J Prosthet Dent 30:303-310, 1973.
53. Brdnnstrom M, Nyborg H: Pulpal reaction to polycarboxylate and zinc phosphate cements used with inlays in deep
cavity preparations, J Am Dent Assoc 94:308-310, 1977.
54. Brdnnstrhm M, Vojinovic O, Nordenvall KJ: Bacteria and
pulpal reactions under silicate cement restorations, J Prosthet
Dent 41:290-295, 1979.
55. Buonocore M, Wileman W, Brudevold F: A report on a resin
composition capable of bonding to human dentin surfaces,
J Dent Res 35:846-851, 1956.
56. Buonocore MG: A simple method of increasing the adhesion of acrylic filling materials to enamel surfaces, J Dent Res
34:849-853, 1955.
57. Buonocore MG, Matsui A, Gwinnett AJ: Penetration of resin
into enamel surfaces with reference to bonding, Arch Oral
Biol 13:61-70,1968.
58. Burke FJT, Watts DC: Fracture resistance of teeth restored with
dentin-bonded crowns, Quintessence Int 25:335-340,1994.
59. Calamia JR, Styner DL, Rattet AH: Effect of Amalgambond
on cervical sensitivity, Am J Dent 8:283-284, 1996.
60. Camps J et al: Effects of desensitizing agents on human
dentin permeability, Am J Dent 11:286-90, 1998.
61. Carvalho RM et al: In vitro study on the dimensional
changes of dentine after demineralization, Arch Oral Biol
41:369-377, 1996.
62. Causton BE: Improved bonding of composite restorative to
dentine: a study in vitro of the use of a commercial halogenated phosphate ester, Br Dent J 156:93-95, 1984.
63. Chang J et al: Shear bond strength of a 4-META adhesive
system, J Prosthet Dent 67:42-45, 1992.
64. Charlton DG, Moore BK, Swartz, ML: In vitro evaluation of
the use of resin liners to reduce microleakage and improve
retention of amalgam restorations, Oper Dent 17:112-119,
1992.

65. Chiba M, Itoh K, Wakumoto S: Effect of dentin cleansers on
the bonding efficacy of dentin adhesive, Dent Mater j 8:76-85,
1989.
66. Chow LC, Brown WE: Phosphoric acid conditioning of teeth
for pit and fissure sealants, J Dent Res 52:1158, 1973.
67. Clarkson BH et al: Effects of phosphoprotein moieties on
the remineralization of human root caries, Caries Res 25:
166-173,1991.
68. Cobb DS, Denehy GE, Vargas MA: Amalgam shear bond
strength to dentin using single-bottle primer/adhesive systems, Am J Dent 12:222-226, 1999.
69. Cobb DS, Reinhardt JW, Vargas MA: Effect of HEMAcontaining dentin desensitizers on shear bond strength of a
resin cement, Am J Dent 10:62-65, 1997.
70. Cooley RL, Tseng EY, Barkmeier WW: Dentinal bond
strengths and microleakage of a 4-META adhesive to amalgam and composite resin, Quintessence Int 22:979-983, 1991.
71. Covey DA, Moon PC: Shear bond strength of dental amalgam bonded to dentin, Am J Dent 4:19-22, 1991.
72. Cox CF et al: Biocompatibility of primer, adhesive and resin
composite systems on non-exposed and exposed pulps of
non-human primate teeth, Am J Dent 11:S55-S63, 1998.
73. Cox CF et al: Biocompatibility of surface-sealed dental materials against exposed pulps, J Prosthet Dent 57:1-8, 1987.
74. Cox CF, Suzuki S: Re-evaluating pulp protection: calcium
hydroxide liners vs. cohesive hybridization, JADA 125:823831,1994.
75. Crim GA, Shay JS: Effect of etchant time on microleakage,
J Dent Child 54:339-340, 1987.
76. Cuenin MF et al: An in vivo study of dentin sensitivity: the
relation of dentin sensitivity and the patency of dentin tubules, J Periodontol 62:668-673, 1991.
77. Czerw RJ et al: Shear bond strength of composite resin to
microetched metal with five newer generation bonding
agents, Oper Dent 20:58-62, 1995.
78. Darr AH, Jacobson PH: Conversion of dual-cure luting cements, J Oral Rehabil 22:43-47, 1995.
79. Davidson CL, Abdalla AI: Effect of occlusal load cycling on
the marginal integrity of adhesive Class V restorations, Am J
Dent 7:111-114,1994.
80. Davidson CL, de Gee AJ: Relaxation of polymerization contraction stresses by flow in dental composites, J Dent Res 63:
146-148,1984.
81. Davidson CL, de Gee AJ, Feilzer A: The competition between the composite -dentin bond strength and the polymerization contraction stress, J Dent Res 63:1396-1399,1984.
82. Davidson CL, Feilzer AJ: Polymerization shrinkage and polymerization shrinkage stress in polymer-based restoratives,
J Dent 25:435-440, 1997.
83. Diaz-Arnold AM, Schneider RL, Aquilino SA: Porcelain repairs: an evaluation of the shear strength of three porcelain
repair systems (abstract 806), J Dent Res 66:207, 1987.
84. Duke ES, Lindemuth J: Polymeric adhesion to dentin: Contrasting substrates, Am J Dent 4:241-146, 1991.
85. Eakle WS et al: Mechanical retention versus bonding of
amalgam and gallium alloy restorations, J Prosthet Dent 72:
351-354,1994.
86. Eanes ED, Lundy DR, Martin GN: X-ray diffraction study of
the mineralization of turkey leg tendon, Calcif Tissue Res 6:
239-248,1970.
87. Eick JD: Smear layer: materials surface, Proc Finn Dent Soc
88:225-242, 1992.
88. Eick JD et al: The dentinal surface: its influence on dentinal
adhesion. I. Quintessence Int 22:967:977, 1991.

CHAPTER 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

89. Eick JD et al: Current concepts on adhesion to dentin, Crit
Rev Oral Biol Med 8:306-335, 1997.
90. Eick JD et al: The dentinal surface: its influence on dentinal
adhesion. 111. Quintessence Int 24:571-582, 1993.
91. Eidelman E, Shapira J, Houpt M: The retention of fissure
sealants using twenty-second etch time: a clinical trial. 1.
J Dent Child 51:422-424, 1984.
92. Eliades G: Clinical relevance of the formulation and testing
of dentine bonding systems, J Dent 22:73-81, 1994.
93. Eliades GC: Dentine bonding systems. In Vanherle G, Degrange M, Willems G, editors: State of the art on direct posterior filling materials and dentine bonding, Leuven, 1993, Van
der Poorten.
94. Eliades GC, Vougiouklakis GJ: 3'P-NMR study of P-based
dental adhesives and electron probe microanalysis of
simulated interfaces with dentin, Dent Mater 5:101-108,
1989.
95. el-Kalla IH, Garcfa-Godoy F: Saliva contamination and
bond strength of single-bottle adhesives to enamel and
dentin, Am J Dent 10:83-87, 1997.
96. Erickson RL: Surface interactions of dentin adhesive materials, Oper Dent 5(suppl):81-94, 1992.
97. Fayyad MA, Ball PC: Cavity sealing ability of lathe-cut,
blend, and spherical amalgam alloys: a laboratory study,
Oper Dent 9:86-93, 1984.
98. Feilzer A, de Gee AJ, Davidson CL: Setting stress in composite resin in relation to configuration of the restoration,
J Dent Res 66:1636-1639, 1987.
99. Felton DA, Bergenholtz G, Kanoy BE: Evaluation of the desensitizing effect of Gluma dentin bond on teeth prepared
for complete coverage restorations, Int J Prosthodont 4:292298,1991.
100. Ferrando JMP et al: Tensile strength and microleakage of
porcelain repair materials, J Prosthet Dent 50:44-50, 1983.
101. Ferrari M et al: Clinical evaluation of a one-bottle bonding
system for desensitizing exposed roots, Am J Dent 12:243249,1999.
102. Ferrari M et al: Effect of two etching times on the sealing
ability of Clearfil Liner Bond 2 in Class V restorations, Am J
Dent 10:66-70, 1997.
103. Finger WJ: Dentin bonding agents. Relevance of in vitro investigations, Am J Dent 184-188, 1988.
104. Fortin D, Perdigao J, Swift EJ: Microleakage of three new
dentin adhesives, Am J Dent 7:315-318, 1994.
105. Fortin D et al: Bond strength and microleakage of current
adhesive systems, Dent Mater 10:253-258, 1994.
106. Fritz UB, Finger WJ, Uno S: Resin-modified glass ionomer
cements: bonding to enamel and dentin, Dent Mater 12:161166, 1996.
107. Fuks AB, Funnel B, Cleaton-Jones P: Pulp response to a
composite resin inserted in deep cavities with and without a
surface seal, J Prosthet Dent 63:129-134, 1990.
108. Fukushima T, Horibe T: A scanning electron microscope investigation of bonding of methacryoyloxyalkyl hydrogen
maleate to etched dentin, J Dent Res 69:46-50, 1990.
109. Fusayama T et al: Non-pressure adhesion of a new adhesive
restorative resin, J Dent Res 58:1364-1370, 1979.
110. Gaffar A: Treating hypersensitivity with fluoride varnishes,
Compend Contin Educ Dent 19:1088-1094, 1998.
111. Garberoglio R, Brannstr6m M: Scanning electron microscopic investigation of human dentinal tubules, Arch Oral
Biol 21:355-362,1976.
112. Gillam DG et al: Perceptions of dentine hypersensitivity in a
general practice population, J Oral Rehabil 26:710-714, 1999.

113. Gilpatrick RO, Ross JA, Simonsen RJ: Resin-to-enamel
bond strengths with various etching times, Quintessence Int
22:47-49,1991.
114. Gladys S et al: Comparative physico-mechanical characterization of new hybrid restorative materials with conventional glass-ionomer and resin composite restorative materials, J Dent Res 76:883-894, 1997.
115. Goes MF, Pachane GCF, Garcfa-Godoy F: Resin bond
strength with different methods to remove excess water from
the dentin, Am J Dent 10:298-301, 1997.
116. GordanV V et al: Effect of different liner treatments on postoperative sensitivity of amalgam restorations, Quintessence Int
30:55-59, 1999.
117. Gordan VV et al: Evaluation of adhesive systems using
acidic primers, Am J Dent 10:219-223, 1997.
118. Gottlieb EW, Retief DH, Jamison HC: An optimal concentration of phosphoric acid as an etching agent: tensile bond
strength studies. Part I. J Prosthet Dent 48:48-51, 1982.
119. Gray A, Ferguson MM, Wall JG: Wine tasting and dental
erosion: case report, Austr Dent J 43:32-34, 1988.
120. Grippo JO: Abfractions: a new classification of hard tissue
lesions of teeth, J Esthet Dent 3:14-19,1991.
121. Gwinnett AJ: Altered tissue contribution to interfacial bond
strength with acid conditioned dentin, Am J Dent 7:243-246,
1994.
122. Gwinnett AJ: Dentin bond strengths after air-drying and
re-wetting, Am J Dent 7:144-148, 1994.
123. Gwinnett AJ: Histologic changes in human enamel following treatment with acidic adhesive conditioning agents, Arch
Oral Biol 16:731-738,1971.
124. Gwinnett AJ: Moist versus dry dentin: its effect on shear
bond strength, Am J Dent 5:127-129, 1992.
125. Gwinnett AJ: Quantitative contribution of resin infiltration/
hybridization to dentin bonding, Am J Dent 6:7-9, 1993.
126. Gwinnett AJ, Buonocore MG: Adhesion and caries prevention: a preliminary report, Br Dent J 119:77-80, 1965.
127. Gwinnett AJ, Garcfa-Godoy F: Effect of etching time and
acid concentration on resin shear bond strength to primary
tooth enamel, Am J Dent 5:237-239, 1992.
128. Gwinnett AJ, Kanca J: Interfacial morphology of resin composite and shiny erosion lesions, Am J Dent 5:315-317, 1992.
129. Gwinnett AJ, Kanca J: Micromorphology of the bonded
dentin interface and its relationship to bond strength, Am J
Dent 5:73-77, 1992.
130. Gwinnett AJ, Matsui A: A study of enamel adhesives: the
physical relationship between enamel and adhesive, Arch
Oral Bio112:1615-1620, 1967.
131. Gwinnett AJ, Tay FR: Early and intermediate time response
of the dental pulp to an acid etch technique in vivo, Am J
Dent 11:S35-S44, 1998.
132. Gwinnett AJ, Yu S: Shear bond strength, microleakage and
gap formation with fourth generation dentin bonding agents,
Am J Dent 7:312-314, 1994.
133. Hadavi F et al: The influence of an adhesive system on shear
bond strength of repaired high-copper amalgams, Oper Dent
16:175-180,1991.
134. Hadavi F et al: Tensile bond strength of repaired amalgam,
J Prosthet Dent 67:313-317, 1992.
135. Hallett KB, Garcfa-Godoy F, Trotter AR: Shear bond strength
of a resin composite to enamel etched with maleic or phosphoric acid, Austr Dent J 39:292-297, 1994.
136. Hals E, Simonsen LT: Histopathology of experimental in vivo
caries around silver amalgam fillings, Caries Res 6:16-33,
1972

CHAPTER

5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

137. Hansen EK: Effect of Scotchbond dependent on cavity
cleaning, cavity diameter and cavosurface angle, Scand J
Dent Res 92:141-147, 1984.
138. Hansen EK Asmussen E: Comparative study of dentin adhesives, Scand J Dent Res 93:280-287, 1985.
139. Harnirattisai C et al: Adhesive interface between resin and
etched dentin of cervical erosion/abrasion lesions, Oper Dent
18:138-143,1993.
140. Hasegawa EA, Boyer DB, Chan DL: Hardening of dualcured cements under composite resin inlays, J Prosthet Dent
66:187-192,1991.
141. Hasegawa T, Retief DH: Laboratory evaluation of experimental restorative systems containing 4-META, Am J Dent
7:212-216, 1994.
142. Hasegawa T et al: A laboratory study of the Amalgambond
Adhesive System, Am J Dent 5:181-186, 1992.
143. Hebling J, Giro EM, Costa CA: Biocompatibility of an adhesive system applied to exposed human dental pulp, J Endod
25:676-682, 1999.
144. Hegdahl T, Gjerdet NR: Contraction stresses of composite
filling materials, Acta Odontol Scand 35:191-195, 1977.
145. Heitman T, Unterbrink G: Direct pulp capping with a dentinal adhesive resin system: a pilot study, Quintessence Int 11:
765-770,1995.
146. Heymann HO et al: Examining tooth flexure effects on cervical restorations: a two-year clinical study, DADA 122:41-47,
1991.
147. Heymann HO et al: Twelve-month clinical study of dentinal
adhesives in Class V cervical lesions, JADA 116:179-183,
1988.
148. Huang GT, S6derholm K-JM: In vitro investigation of shear
bond strength of a phosphate based dentinal bonding
agent, Scand J Dent Res 97:84-92, 1989.
149. Ianzano JA, Mastrodomenico J, Gwinnett AJ: Strength of
amalgam restorations bonded with Amalgambond, Am J
Dent 6:10-12, 1993.
150. Ide M et al: The role of a dentine-bonding agent in reducing
cervical dentine sensitivity, J Clin Periodontol 25:286-290,
1998.
151. Inaba D et al: The influence of air-drying on hyper-remineralization of demineralized dentin: a study on bulk as well as on
thin wet section of bovine dentin, Caries Res 29:231-236,1995.
152. Inai N et al: Adhesion between collagen depleted dentin
and dentin adhesive, Am J Dent 11:123-127, 1998.
153. Inokoshi S, Iwaku M, Fusayama T: Pulpal response to a new
adhesive restorative resin, J Dent Res 61:1014-1019, 1982.
154. Ishioka S, Caputo AA: Interaction between the dentinal
smear layer and composite bond strengths, J Prosthet Dent
61:180-185,1989.
155. James DF,Yarovesky U: An esthetic inlay technique for posterior teeth, Quintessence Int 11:725-731, 1983.
156. Jendresen MD: Clinical performance of a new composite
resin for Class V erosion (abstract 1057), J Dent Res 57:339,
1978.
157. Jochen DG, Caputo AA: Composite resin repair of porcelain
denture teeth, J Prosthet Dent 38:673-679, 1997.
158. Jordan RE, Suzuki M, Davidson DF: Clinical evaluation of a
universal dentin bonding resin: preserving dentition through
new materials, JADA 124:71-76, 1993.
159. Kanca J: Dental adhesion and the All-Bond system, J Esthet
Dent 3:129-132, 1991.
160. Kanca J: The effect of heat on the surface hardness of lightactivated composite resins, Quintessence Int 20:899-901,
1989.

161. Kanca J: Effect of resin primer solvents and surface wetness
on resin composite bond strength to dentin, Am J Dent 5:
213-221,1992.
162. Kanca J: One Step bond strength to enamel and dentin, Am
J Dent 10:5-8, 1997.
163. Kanca J: Replacement of a fractured incisor fragment over
pulpal exposure: a case report, Quintessence Int 24:81-84,1993.
164. Kanca J: Resin bonding to wet substrate: bonding to dentin.
1. Quintessence Int 23:39-41, 1992.
165. Kanca J: Wet bonding: effect of drying time and distance, Am
J Dent 9:273-276, 1996.
166. Kanca J, Sandrik J: Bonding to dentin: clues to the mechanism of adhesion, Am J Dent 11:154-159, 1998.
167. Kanca J, Suh BI: Pulse activation: reducing resin-based composite contraction stresses at the enamel cavosurface margins, Am J Dent 12:107-112,1999.
168. Kato G, Nakabayashi N: Effect of phosphoric acid concentration on wet-bonding to etched dentin, Dent Mater 12:
250-255,1996.
169. Kemp-Scholte CM, Davidson CL: Complete marginal seal
of Class V resin composite restorations effected by increased
flexibility, J Dent Res 69:1240-1243, 1990.
170. Kemp-Scholte CM, Davidson CL: Marginal integrity related
to bond strength and strain capacity of composite resin
restorative systems, J Prosthet Dent 64:658-664, 1990.
171. Kennington LB et al: Short-term clinical evaluation of postoperative sensitivity with bonded amalgams, Am J Dent 11:
177-180,1998.
172. Kerns DG et al: Dentinal tubule occlusion and root hypersensitivity, J Periodontol 62:421-428, 1991.
173. Lacy AM et al: Effect of porcelain surface treatment on the
bond to composite, J Prosthet Dent 60:288-291, 1988.
174. Lacy AM, Rupprecht R, Watanabe L: Use of self-curing composite resins to facilitate amalgam repair, Quintessence Int 23:
53-59,1992.
175. Latta MA et al: Three-year clinical evaluation of the Clearfil
Liner Bond 2 system (abstract 1030), J Dent Res 79:272, 2000.
176. Lee HL et al: Effects of acid etchants on dentin. J Dent Res
52:1228-1233, 1973.
177. Lopes LMP, Leitao JGM, Douglas WH: Effect of a new resin
inlay/onlay restorative material on cuspal reinforcement,
Quintessence Int 22:641-645, 1991.
178. Maciel KT et al: The effect of acetone, ethanol, HEMA, and
air on the stiffness of human decalcified dentin matrix. J Dent
Res 75:1851-1858, 1996.
179. Macko DJ, Rutberg M, Langeland K: Pulpal response to the
application of phosphoric acid to dentin, Oral Surg 6:930946,1978.
180. Manson-Rahemtulla B, Retief DH, Jamison HC: Effect of
concentrations of phosphoric acid on enamel dissolution,
J Prosthet Dent 51:495-498, 1984.
181. Marchetti C, Piacentini C, Menghini P: Morphometric computerized analysis on the dentinal tubules and the collagen
fibers in the dentine of human permanent teeth, Bull Group
Int Rech Sci Stomatol Odontol 35:125-129, 1992.
182. Mardaga WJ, Shannon IL: Decreasing the depth of etch for
direct bonding in orthodontics, J Clin Orthodont 16:130-132,
1982.
183. Marshall GW et al: Dentin demineralization: Effects of dentin depth, pH and different acids, Dent Mater 13: 338-343,
1997.
184. McCullock AJ, Smith BGN: In vitro studies of cuspal movement produced by adhesive restorative materials, Br Dent J
161:405-409, 1986.

C H A PT E R 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

185. McLean JW: Bonding to enamel and dentin (letter),

Quin-

209.

tessence Int 26:334, 1995.
186.

187.

188.
189.

190.

191.
192.

McLean JW, Kramer IRH: A clinical and pathological evaluation of a sulphinic acid activated resin for use in restorative
dentistry, Br Dent J 93:255, 1952.
McLean JW, Nicholson JW, Wilson AD: Proposed nomenclature for glass-ionomer dental cements and related materials (guest editorial), Quintessence Int 25:587, 1994.
Meiers JC, Turner EW: Microleakage of dentin/amalgam alloy
bonding agents: results after 1 year, Oper Dent 23:30-35,1998.
Mejare B, Mejare 1, Edwardsson S: Acid etching and composite resin restorations: a culturing and histologic study on
bacterial penetration, Acta Odontol Scand 3:1-5, 1987.
Mejare I, Mejare B, Edwardsson S: Effect of a tight seal on
survival of bacteria in saliva-contaminated cavities filled
with composite resin, Endod Dent Traumatol 3:6-9, 1987.
Miller BH et al: Bond strengths of various materials to
dentin using Amalgambond, Am j Dent 5:272-276,1992.
Mitchem JC, Gronas DG: Effects of time after extraction and
depth of dentin on resin dentin adhesives, DADA 113:285287,1986.

193.

194.

195.
196.

197.
198.

199.

sence Int 28:651-656, 1997.
210.

201.

202.
203.

204.
205.

214.

218.

Pashley DH: Dentin bonding: overview of the substrate with
respect to adhesive material, J Esthet Dent 3:46-50, 1991.
Pashley DH: Dentin: a dynamic substrate-a review, Scanning Microsc 3:161-176, 1989.

219.
220.

Pashley DH: The effects of acid etching on the pulpodentin
complex, Oper Dent 17:229-242, 1992.
Pashley DH: The influence of dentin permeability and putpal blood flow on pulpal solute concentrations, J Ended 5:
355-361,1979.

221.

Pashley DH, Depew DD, Galloway SE: Microleakage channels: scanning electron microscopic observation, Oper Dent
14:68-72,1989.

222.

Pashley DH et al: Fluid shifts across human dentine in vitro
in response to hydrodynamic stimuli. Arch Oral Biol 41:
1065-1072,1996.

223.

Pashley DH et al: The microtensile test: A review,

J Adhes

Dent 1:299-309, 1999.
224.

Res 74:1679-1688, 1995.

228.

Newburg R Pameijer CH: Composite resin bonded to porcelain with a silane solution, JADA 96:288-291, 1978.
Nikaido T et al: Effect of pulpal pressure on adhesion of
resin composite to dentin: bovine serum versus saline, QuinNordenvall K-J, Brannstrbm M, Malmgren O: Etching of deciduous teeth and young and old permanent teeth: a comparison between 15 and 60 seconds of etching, Am J Ortho-

Pashley DH et al: Permeability of dentin to adhesive agents,
Quintessence Int 24:618-631, 1993.

225.
226.

Pashley DH, Homer JA, Brewer PD: Interactions of conditioners on the dentin surface, Oper Dent 5(suppl):137-150, 1992.
Pashley DH, Livingstone MJ, Greenhill JD: Regional resistances to fluid flow in human dentine in vitro, Arch Oral Biol
23:807-810, 1978.

227.

Pashley EL et al: Amalgam buildups: Shear bond strength
and dentin sealing properties, Oper Dent 16:82-89, 1991.
Paul SJ, Welter DA, Ghazi M, Pashley D: Nanoleakage at the
dentin adhesive interface vs microtensile bond strength,
Oper Dent 24:181-188, 1999.

229.

230.

Perdigao J: An ultra-morphological study of human dentine
exposed to adhesive systems (doctoral thesis, ISBN 90801303-4-6), Katholieke Universiteit to Leuven. Leuven,
1995, Van der Poorten.
Perdigao J, Baratieri LN, Lopes M: Laboratory evaluation and
clinical application of a new one-bottle adhesive, J Esthet
Dent 11:23-35, 1999.

testing: what does it mean?

Int Dent

231.

Oliveira JP, Cochran MA, Moore BK: Influence of bonded
amalgam restorations on the fracture strength of teeth, Oper

232.

Dent 21:110-115, 1996.

Panighi M, G'Sell C: Influence of calcium concentration on
the dentin wettability by an adhesive, J Biomed Mater Res 26:
1081-1089,1992.

217.

dont 78:99-108, 1980.

208.

Pameijer CH, Stanley HR: The disastrous effects of the"total
etch" technique in vital pulp capping in primates, Am J Dent
11:545-S54, 1998.

Murray L, Roberts AJ: The prevalence of self-reported hypersensitive teeth, Arch Oral Bio139:129S-1355, 1994.
Nakabayashi N, Kojima K Masuhara E: The promotion of
adhesion by the infiltration of monomers into tooth substrates, J Biomed Mater Res 16:265-273, 1982.
Nakabayashi N, Nakamura M, Yasuda N: Hybrid layer as a
dentin-bonding mechanism, J Esthet Dent 3:133-138, 1991.
Nakajima M et al: Tensile bond strength and SEM evaluation of caries-affected dentin using dentin adhesives, J Dent

207. Oilo G: Bond strength
J 43:492-498, 1993.

Packham DE: Adhesion. In Packham DE, editor: Handbook of
adhesion, Essex, 1992 Longman Scientific & Technical.
Pameijer CH, Louw NP: Significance of pulpal pressure
during clinical bonding procedures, Am J Dent 10:214-218,
1997.

215.

tessence Int 26:221-226, 1995.
206.

Oysaed H, Ruyter IE: Water sorption and filler characteristics of composites for use in posterior teeth, J Dent Res 65:
1315-1318,1986.

213.

1411,1985.
200.

Osborne JW, Summit JB: Mechanical properties and clinical
performance of a gallium restorative material, Oper Dent 20:
241-245,1995.

212.

Miyazaki M et al: Effect of filler content of light-cured composites on bond strength to bovine dentine, J Dent 19:301Mjbr IA, Hensten-Pettersen A, Bowen RL: Biological assessments of experimental cavity cleansers: correlation between
in vitro and in vivo studies, J Dent Res 61:967-972, 1982
Morin D, DeLong R, Douglas WH: Cusp reinforcement by
the acid-etch technique, J Dent Res 63:1075-1078, 1984.
Moritz A et al: Long-term effects of CO, laser irradiation on
treatment of hypersensitive dental necks: results of an in
vivo study, J Clin Laser Med Surg 16:211-215, 1998.
Morris MF, Davis RD, Richardson BW: Clinical efficacy of
two dentin desensitizing agents, Am J Dent 12:72-76, 1999.
Munksgaard EC: Amine-induced polymerization of aqueous HEMA/aldehyde during action as a dentin bonding
agent, J Dent Res 69:1236-1239, 1990.
Munksgaard EC, Irie M, Asmussen E: Dentin-polymer bond
promoted by Gluma and various resins, J Dent Res 64:1409-

Opdam NJ et al: Marginal integrity and postoperative sensitivity in Class 2 resin composite restorations in vivo, J Dent
26:555-562,1998.

211.

216.

303,1991.

Olmez A, Cula S, Ulusu T: Clinical evaluation and marginal
leakage of Amalgambond Plus: three-year results, Quintes-

Perdigao J et al: The effect of a re-wetting agent on dentin
bonding, Dent Mater 15:282-295, 1999.
Perdigao J et al: Effects of a self-etching primer on enamel
shear bond strengths and SEM morphology, Am J Dent 10:
141-146,1997.

C H A PT E R 5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

233. Perdigao J et al: In vitro bond strengths and SEM evaluation
of dentin bonding systems to different dentin substrates,
J Dent Res 73:44-55, 1994.

256. Retief DH, Denys FR: Adhesion to enamel and dentin, Am J
Dent 2:133-144, 1989.
257. Roeder LB, DeSchepper EJ, Powers JM: In vitro bond

234. Perdigao J et al: The interaction of adhesive systems with
dentin, Am J Dent 9:167-173, 1996.
235. Perdigao J et al: A morphological field emission SEM study

tems, J Esthet Dent 3:126-128, 1991.
258. Romney RL, Dickens SH: Bonding to dry dentin with water-

of the effect of six phosphoric acid etching agents on human
dentin, Dent Mater 12:262-271, 1996.

modified acetone-based primers (abstract 1948), J Dent Res
76:257, 1997.

236. Perdigao J, Lopes M: Dentin bonding: questions for the new
millennium, JAdhes Dent 1:191-209, 1999.
237. Perdigao J, Ramos JC, Lambrechts P: In vitro interfacial rela-

259. Rosa BT, Perdigao J: Bond strengths of nonrinsing adhesives, Quintessence Int 31:353-358, 2000.
260. Rosenblatt J, Devereux B, Wallace DG: Injectable collagen as

tionship between human dentin and one-bottle dental adhesives, Dent Mater 13:218-227, 1997.

a pH-sensitive hydrogel, Biomaterials 15:985-995, 1994.
261. Royse MC, Ott NW, Mathieu G: Dentin adhesive superior to

238. Perdigao J, Swift EJ: Adhesion of a total-etch phosphate ester bonding agent, Am J Dent 7:149-152, 1994.

copal varnish in preventing microleakage in primary teeth,
Pediatr Dent 18:440-443, 1996.

239. Perdigao J, Swift EJ: Analysis of dental adhesive systems using scanning electron microscopy, Int Dent J 44:349-359,

262. Rueggeberg FA: Substrate for adhesion testing to tooth
structure: review of the literature, Dent Mater 7:2-10, 1991.

1994.
240. Perdigao J, Swift EJ, Cloe BC: Effects of etchants, surface

263. Ruyter IE: The chemistry of adhesive agents, Oper Dent
5(suppl):32-43, 1992.
264. Sano H et al: Long-term durability of dentin bonds made

moisture, and resin composite on dentin bond strengths,
Am J Dent 6:61-64, 1993.
241. Perinka L, Sano H, Hosoda H: Dentin thickness, hardness
and Ca-concentration vs bond strength of dentin adhesives,
Dent Mater 8:229-233,1992.
242. Peutzfeldt A: Dual-cure resin cements: in vitro wear and effect of quantity of remaining double-bonds, filler volume
and light-curing, Acta Odontol Scand 53:29-34, 1995.

strength of repaired amalgam with adhesive bonding sys-

with a self-etching primer in vivo, J Dent Res 78:906-911,
1999.
265. Sano H et al: Microporous dentin zone beneath resinimpregnated layer, Oper Dent 19:59-64, 1994.
266. Sano H et al: Nanoleakage: Leakage within the hybrid layer,
Oper Dent 20:18-25, 1995.
267. Sano H et al: Relationship between surface area for adhe-

243. Phrukkanon S, Burrow MF, Tyas MJ: The influence of crosssectional shape and surface area on the microtensile bond
test, Dent Mater 14:212-221, 1998.

sion and tensile bond strength: evaluation of a micro-tensile
bond test, Dent Mater 10:236-240, 1994.
268. Sano H et al: Tensile properties of resin-infiltrated deminer-

244. Pilo R Brosh T, Chweidan H: Cusp reinforcement by bonding of amalgam restorations, J Dent 26:467-472, 1998.

alized human dentin, J Dent Res 74:1093-1102, 1995.
269. Sasaki N, Odajima S: Stress-strain curve and Young's mod-

245. Pimenta LA et al: Inhibition of demineralization in vitro
around amalgam restorations, Quintessence Int 29:363-367,

ulus of a collagen molecule as determined by the x-ray diffraction technique, J Biomechanics 29:655-658, 1996.

1998.
246. Pintado MR, Douglas WH: The comparison of microleakage

270. Sasaki N et al: X-ray diffraction studies on the structure of
hydrated collagen, Biopolymers 22:2539-2547, 1983.
271. Saunders WP, Strang R Ahmad I: Shear bond strength of Mi-

between two different dentin bonding resin systems, Quintessence Int 19:905-907, 1988.
247. Quarnstrom F et al: A randomized clinical trial of agents to
reduce sensitivity after crown cementation, Gen Dent 46:6874,1988.
248. Qvist V, Stoltze K, Qvist J: Human pulp reactions to resin
restorations performed with different acid-etched restorative procedures, Acta Odontol Scand 47:253-263, 1989.
249. Ramos JC, Perdigao J: Shear bond strengths and SEM morphology of dentin-amalgam adhesives, Am J Dent 10:152-158,
1997.
250. Ramos JC et al: Effect of supplemental polymerization on
the bond strengths of adhesive amalgam restorations (abstract 373), J Dent Res 77:678, 1998.
251. Reeder OW et al: Dentin permeability: determinants of hydraulic conductance, J Dent Res 57:187-193, 1978.
252. Reifeis PE, Cochran MA, Moore BK: An in vitro shear bond
strength study of enamel/dentin bonding systems on enamel,
Oper Dent 20:174-179, 1995.
253. Reinhardt JW, Krell KV: Effect of desensitizers and bonding
agents on radicular dentin permeability (abstract 1332), J Dent
Res 76:180, 1997.
254. Reinhardt JW, Stephens NH, Fortin D: Effect of Gluma desensitization on dentin bond strength, Am J Dent 8:170-172,
1995.
255. Retief DH, Austin JC, Fatti LP: Pulpal response to phosphoric acid, J Oral Patho13:114-122, 1974.

rage Bond to enamel and dentin, Am J Dent 4:265-267,1991.
272. Scherman A, Jacobsen PL: Managing dentin hypersensitivity: what treatment to recommend to patients, JADA 123:
57-61,1992.
273. Schiipbach P, Lutz F, Finger WJ: Closing of dentinal tubules
by Gluma desensitizer, Eur J Oral Sci 105:414-421, 1997.
274. Schwartz RS, Conn LJ Jr, Haveman CW: Clinical evaluation
of two desensitizing agents for use under Class 5 silver
amalgam restorations, J Prosthet Dent 80:269-273, 1998.
275. Selvig KA:. Ultrastructural changes in human dentine exposed to a weak acid, Arch Oral Biol 13:719-734, 1968.
276. Sepetcioglu F, Ataman BA: Long-term monitoring of microleakage of cavity varnish and adhesive resin with amalgam, J Prosthet Dent 79:136-139, 1998.
277. Shaffer SE, Barkmeier WW, Kelsey WP: Effects of reduced
acid conditioning time on enamel microleakage, Gen Dent
35:278-280, 1987.
278. Sheth J, Jensen M, Tolliver D: Effect of surface treatment on
etched porcelain and bond strength to enamel, Dent Mater
4:328-337, 1998.
279. ShonoY et al: Regional measurement of resin-dentin bonding as an array, J Dent Res 78:699-705, 1998.
280. Sidhu SK: The effect of acid-etched dentin on marginal seal,
Quintessence Int 25:797-800, 1994.
281. Silverstone LM: Fissure sealants: laboratory studies, Caries
Res 8:2-26, 1974.

CHAPTER

5

Fundamental Concepts of Enamel and Dentin Adhesion

332. van Meerbeek B et al: A TEM study of two water-based adhesive systems bonded to dry and wet dentin, J Dent Res 77:
50-59,1998.
333. van Meerbeek B et al: Three-year clinical effectiveness of
four total-etch dentinal adhesive systems in cervical lesions,
Quintessence Int 27:775-784, 1996.
334. Versluis A, Tantbirojn D, Douglas WH: Why do shear bond
tests pull out dentin? J Dent Res 76:1298-1307, 1997.
335. Wang J-D, Hume WR: Diffusion of hydrogen ion and hydroxyl ion from various sources through dentine, Int Endod J
21:17-26,1988.
336. Warfvinge J, Dahlen G, Bergenholtz G: Dental pulp response to bacterial cell wall material, J Dent Res 64:10461050,1985.
337. Watanabe F, Powers JM, Lorey RE: In vitro bonding of
prosthodontic adhesives to dental alloys, J Dent Res 67:479783,1988.
338. Watanabe 1, Nakabayashi N, Pashley DH: Bonding to
ground dentin by a Phenyl-P self-etching primer, J Dent Res
73:1212-1220, 1994.
339. Watanabe T et al: The effects of primers on the sensitivity of
dentin, Dent Mater 7:148-150, 1991.
340. Wendt SL: The effect of heat used as a secondary cure upon
the physical properties of three composite resins: diametral
tensile strength, compressive strength and marginal dimention stability. 1. Quintessence Int 18:265-271, 1987.
341. Wendt SL: The effect of heat used as a secondary cure upon
the physical properties of three composite resins: wear,

hardness, and color stability. 11. Quintessence Int 18:351-356,
1987.
342. West N, Addy M, Hughes J: Dentine hypersensitivity: the effects of brushing desensitizing toothpastes, their solid and
liquid phases, and detergents on dentine and acrylic: studies in vitro, J Oral Rehabil 25:885-895, 1998.
343. White KS et al: Pulp response to adhesive resin systems applied to acid-etched vital dentin: damp versus dry primer
application, Quintessence Int 25:259-268, 1994.
344. Wolinsky LE, Armstrong RW, Seghi RR: The determination
of ionic bonding interactions of N-Phenyl Glycine and N(2-hydroxy-3-methacryloxypropyl)-N-Phenyl Glycine as
measured by Carbon-13 NMR analysis, J Dent Res 72:72-77,
1993.
345. Yanagawa T Finger WJ: Relationship between degree of
polymerization of resin composite and bond strength of
Gluma-treated dentin, Am J Dent 7:157-160, 1994.
346. Yates R et al: The effects of a potassium citrate, cetylpyridinium chloride, sodium fluoride mouthrinse on dentine hypersensitivity, plaque and gingivitis: a placebo-controlled
study, J Clin Periodonto125:813-820, 1998.
347. Yoshiyama M et al: Regional bond strengths of resins to human root dentine, J Dent 24:435-442, 1996.
348. Yoshiyama M et al: Regional strengths of bonding agents
to cervical sclerotic root dentin, J Dent Res 75:1404-1413,
1996.
349. Zhang C et al: Effects of CO, laser in treatment of cervical
dentinal hypersensitivity, J Endod 24:595-597, 1998.

I.
II.
III.
I V.
V.

VI.

Definition of tooth preparation, 271
Need for restorations, 271
Objectives of tooth preparation, 271
Stages and steps of tooth preparation, 272
Factors affecting tooth preparation, 273
A. General factors, 273
1. Diagnosis, 273
2. Knowledge of dental anatomy, 273
3. Patient factors, 273
B. Conservation of tooth structure, 274
C. Restorative material factors, 274
Nomenclature, 274
A. Caries terminology, 274
1. Location of caries, 274
2. Extent of caries, 276
3. Rate (speed) of caries, 276
4. Grooves and fissures; fossae and pits, 276
5. Extension for prevention, enameloplasty,
sealant, and preventive resin or conservative composite restoration, 277
6. Prophylactic odontotomy, 277
7. Affected and infected dentin, 277
B. Noncarious tooth defects terminology, 278
1. Abrasion, 278
2. Erosion, 278
3. Abfraction, 278
4. Attrition, 278
5. Fractures, 278
6. Nonhereditary enamel hypoplasia, 279
7. Amelogenesis imperfecta, 279
8. Dentinogenesis imperfecta, 279
C. Tooth preparation terminology, 279
1. Simple, compound, and complex tooth
preparations, 279
2. Abbreviated descriptions of tooth
preparations, 279
3. Tooth preparation walls, 279
4. Tooth preparation angles, 280
5. Dentinoenamel junction, 280
6. Cementoenamel junction, 280
7. Enamel margin strength, 280
8. Vertical (longitudinal) and horizontal
(transverse) terminology, 281

9. Intracoronal and extracoronal tooth
preparations, 281
10. Anatomic tooth crown and clinical tooth
crown, 281
D. Classification of tooth preparations, 281
1. Class I restorations, 281
2. Class II restorations, 281
3. Class III restorations, 283
4. Class IV restorations, 283
5. Class V restorations, 283
6. Class VI restorations, 283
VII. I nitial and final stages of tooth preparation, 283
A. Initial tooth preparation stage, 285
1. Step 1: outline form and initial
depth, 286
2. Step 2: primary resistance form, 290
3. Step 3: primary retention form, 292
4. Step 4: convenience form, 293
B. Final tooth preparation stage, 294
1. Step 5: removal of any remaining enamel
pit or fissure, infected dentin, and/or old
restorative material, if indicated, 294
2. Step 6: pulp protection, if indicated, 295
3. Step 7: secondary resistance and retention
forms, 298
4. Step 8: procedures for finishing the external
walls of the tooth preparation, 299
5. Step 9: final procedures: cleaning,
i nspecting, and sealing, 301
VIII. Additional concepts in tooth preparation, 303
A. Amalgam restorations, 303
1. Amalgam box-only tooth restorations, 303
2. Amalgam tunnel tooth restorations, 303
3. Adhesive amalgam restorations, 303
B. Composite restorations, 303
1. Composite box-only tooth
restorations, 303
2. Composite tunnel tooth restorations, 304
3. "Sandwich" technique, 304
C. Bonded restorations strengthen weakened
tooth structure, 304
I X. Summary, 305

CHAPTER

The discipline of operative dentistry harbors the essential knowledge of basic tooth restoration, which is of utmost importance to the dental student and dental practitioner. This basic knowledge must not be construed as
simply treating a tooth, but rather in the context of treating a person. The physiologic and psychologic aspects
of the patient must be given proper consideration. In the
sense of local treatment, biologic and mechanical factors
regarding care of tooth tissues and contiguous oral tissues are paramount. Procedural organization for tooth
preparation is emphasized in this chapter. Nomenclature associated with tooth preparation, including the
historical classification of carious lesions (cavities), also
is presented.
In the past, most restorative treatment was due to
caries (decay), and the term cavity was used to describe a
carious lesion in a tooth that had progressed to the point
that part of the tooth structure had been destroyed.
Thus the tooth was cavitated (a breach in the surface integrity of the tooth) and was referred to as a cavity. Likewise, when the affected tooth was repaired, the cutting
or preparation of the remaining tooth structure (to best
receive a restorative material) was referred to as a cavity
preparation.

Now many indications for treatment for teeth are not
due to caries and, therefore, the preparation of the tooth
is no longer referred to as cavity preparation but as tooth
preparation, and the term cavity is used only as a historical reference.

DEFINITION OF
TOOTH PREPARATION
Tooth preparation is defined as the mechanical alteration of a defective, injured, or diseased tooth to best receive a restorative material that will reestablish a
healthy state for the tooth, including esthetic corrections
where indicated, along with normal form and function.
Included in the procedure of preparing the tooth is the
removal of all defective or friable tooth structure because remaining infected or friable tooth structure may
result in further caries progression, sensitivity or pain,
or fracture of the tooth and/or restoration. This textbook
covers such preparations, with the exception of preparation for either a three-quarter crown or full crown.

NEED FOR RESTORATIONS
Teeth need restorative intervention for various reasons.
Foremost is the need to repair a tooth after destruction
from a carious lesion. A large, extensive restoration may
be required in treating a large carious lesion, or a smaller,
more conservative restoration may restore the tooth to
proper form and function when the lesion is small. Another common need is the replacement or repair of restorations with serious defects, such as improper proximal
contact, gingival excess, defective open margins, or poor
esthetics. Restorations also are indicated to restore
proper form and function to fractured teeth. Such teeth

6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

present with minor to major tooth structure missing or
with an incomplete fracture ("greenstick fracture"), resulting in a tooth that has compromised function and,
many times, pain or sensitivity. A tooth may require a
restoration to simply restore form or function absent as a
result of congenital malformation. A careful assessment
of other diagnostic factors must be undertaken before
restoration of such teeth to avoid unnecessary restorative intervention. With an increasing number of older
persons who are retaining their natural teeth, the prevalence of incomplete tooth fracture is expected to increase.
The proper restoration of such fractured teeth requires
early diagnosis and knowledgeable, skillful treatment.
As previously mentioned, an esthetic desire of a patient
may be a reason for placing (and replacing) restorations.
An increasing percentage of practitioners' operative treatments are solely as a result of patient desires to improve
appearance (see Chapter 15). These may or may not involve complex tooth preparations. Restorations also are
required for teeth simply as part of fulfilling other restorative needs. For example, when replacing a missing tooth
with a fixed or removable partial denture, the teeth adjacent to the space usually require some type of restorative
procedure to allow for adequate placement and/or function of the prosthesis. Lastly, a tooth may be restored in
a preventive sense. Because caries is an infectious disease, the removal of the caries during the restoration of a
tooth reduces the microorganisms involved in the disease and thereby may reduce the potential spread.
However, it should be completely understood that restorative intervention primarily repairs damage caused by
caries and by itself does not rid the patient of the factors that
caused the disease initially. To accomplish an effective pre-

ventive program that places the patient into a low-risk
status for developing future caries or periodontal disease, a complete assessment must be made of (1) the type
and number of microorganisms present; (2) the patient's
homecare ability, effectiveness, and motivation; (3) the
need for antimicrobial therapy; and (4) dietary factors.

OBJECTIVES OF
TOOTH PREPARATION
In general terms, the objectives of tooth preparation are
to: (1) remove all defects and provide necessary protection to the pulp, (2) extend the restoration as conservatively as possible, (3) form the tooth preparation so that
under the force of mastication the tooth or the restoration or both will not fracture and the restoration will not
be displaced, and (4) allow for the esthetic and functional placement of a restorative material.
Much of the scientific foundation on which these objectives are executed was presented by Black . 4 For many
years the Black tooth preparations, with few modifications, formed the basis for most operative preparation
procedures. Modifications of Black's principles of tooth
preparation have resulted from the influence of Bronner,
R. Sturdevant43 Sockwell and
Ireland' ° Markley

C H A PT E R

6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

C. Sturdevant 41 as well as from improvements in restorative materials, instruments, and techniques, and the increased knowledge and application of preventive measures for caries and periodontal disease.
In the past, most tooth preparations were very precise
procedures, usually resulting in uniform depths, particular wall forms, and specific marginal configurations.
Such precise preparations are still required for amalgam
and cast metal restorations. However, because of the use
of adhesive restorations, primarily composites, the degree of precision of tooth preparations has decreased.
Many composite restorations may require only the removal of the defect (caries or defective restorative material) and friable tooth structure for tooth preparation,
without specific uniform depths, wall designs, or marginal forms. This simplification of the tooth preparation
process is due to the physical properties of the composite material and the strong bond obtained between the
composite and tooth structure.

STAGES AND STEPS OF
TOOTH PREPARATION
The preparation procedure is divided into two stages
(initial and final), primarily to allow assessment of the
beginning operator's knowledge and ability. While the

FIG . 6-1

separation into stages may facilitate better adherence to
preparation principles and pulpal protection for all operators, it is particularly beneficial in an academic setting. Having student operators complete initial preparation before extensive caries excavation allows the
attending faculty member to better assess the student's
knowledge of, and ability to perform, proper preparation extensions. Each stage has several steps that are discussed comprehensively later in this chapter. It is important to realize that the stages do exist for specific
reasons. The first stage of tooth preparation is referred
to as the initial tooth preparation stage. In this stage, the
mechanical alterations of the tooth are extended to sound
tooth structure (sound dentin or enamel supported by
noncarious dentin) in all directions (facially, lingually,
gingivally, incisally or occlusally, mesially, and distally)
while adhering to a specific, limited pulpal or axial
depth (Fig. 6-1). In this way, the final dimensions of the
restoration can be anticipated (minus any necessary
bevels). The preparation walls are designed in the initial
stage of tooth preparation to both retain the restorative
material in the tooth and resist potential fracture of the
tooth or restoration from masticatory forces delivered
principally in the long axis of the tooth. Additional features for retaining the restorative material and protect-

I nitial tooth preparation. Note in A, B, and C that extensions in all
directions are to sound tooth structure while maintaining a specific limited pulpal or axial depth regardless whether end (or side) of bur is in
dentin, caries, old restorative material, or air. DEJ and CEJ indicated in B.
Note in A that initial depth is approximately two thirds of 3-mm bur head
l ength, or 2 mm, as related to prepared facial and lingual walls, but is
half the No. 245 bur head length, or 1.5 mm, as related to central fissure
l ocation.

CHAPTER 6

ing against fracture may be deemed necessary as part of
the final stage of tooth preparation. Guidelines for appropriate extensions during initial tooth preparation are
discussed in detail later.
Final tooth preparation, the second stage of tooth
preparation, is the completion of the tooth preparation.
It includes excavating any remaining, infected carious
dentin; removing old restorative material if indicated;
protecting the pulp; incorporating additional preparation design features that both minimize the chance of
tooth or restoration fracture against oblique forces and
maximize the retention of the material in the tooth; finishing preparation walls, particularly regarding the margins; and performing the final procedures of cleaning,
inspecting, and, sometimes, sealing the preparation before placement of the restorative material. (Bonded restorations seal the prepared tooth during the bonding
process.) Specific final tooth preparation steps and features that relate to completing the preparation procedure are discussed in subsequent sections. (Treatment of
the preparation walls for adhesive bonding of restorative materials is considered the first procedure in the insertion of the restoration.)
FACTORS AFFECTING
TOOTH PREPARATION
Preparing a tooth to receive a restorative material is a
comprehensive endeavor. As routine or mundane as it
may seem, many factors affect the appropriate tooth
preparation design for a given tooth. These factors must
be considered for each restorative procedure contemplated, the end result being that no two preparations are
the same. This section presents many of the factors that
must be considered before any mechanical alteration of
a tooth.
GENERAL FACTORS
Diagnosis. Before any restorative procedure, a complete and thorough diagnosis must be made. There must
be a reason to place a restoration in the tooth. The reasons, as presented earlier, may include caries, fractured
teeth, esthetic needs, or needs for improved form or
function. A careful examination as described in Chapter
9 must be made to determine a diagnosis and subsequent
treatment recommendation. An assessment of both pulpal and periodontal status will influence the potential
treatment of the tooth, especially in terms of the choice of
restorative material as well as the design of the tooth
preparation.
Likewise, an assessment of the occlusal relationships
must be made. Such knowledge often affects the design
of the tooth preparation and the choice of material. The
patient's concern for esthetics should be considered when
planning the restorative procedure and will influence
the restorative material selected. Esthetic considerations
will also influence the tooth preparation by altering, in
some situations, the extension or design.

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

The relationship of a specific restorative procedure
with other treatment planned for the patient must be considered. For example, if the tooth is an abutment for a
fixed or removable partial denture, the design of the restoration may need to be altered to accommodate maximum effectiveness of that prosthesis.
Lastly, the risk potential of the patient to further dental
disease should be assessed. If appropriate, diagnostic
tests should be performed to determine the risk the patient has for further dental caries. A high-risk patient may
require altered treatment planning initially, until the risk
factors are better controlled. This may mean that caries
control procedures should be instituted, followed by
more definitive treatment once the patient's homecare,
dietary habits, and microbiologic assays are improved.
Also, more conservative, less expensive restorative procedures may be planned initially until caries factors are
controlled.
Knowledge of Dental Anatomy. Proper tooth preparation is accomplished through systematic procedures
based on definite physical and mechanical principles. A
prerequisite for understanding tooth preparation is
knowledge of the anatomy of each tooth and its related
parts. A gross picture, both internal and external, of the
individual tooth being operated on must be visualized.
The direction of the enamel rods, the thickness of the
enamel and dentin, the size and position of the pulp, the
relationship of the tooth to supporting tissues, and other
factors must all be known to facilitate accurate judgment in tooth preparation.
Patient Factors. Patient factors must play an important role in determining the appropriate restorative
treatment rendered. The patient's knowledge and appreciation of good dental health influence his or her desire for
restorative care and may influence his or her choice
of restorative materials. Certainly the patient's economic
status is a factor in selecting the type of restorative care
selected, and the patient's input in this regard must be
obtained. Too often dentists predetermine what they believe is the patient's best economic alternatives and realize later that their assessment was incorrect and that
other, more suitable, treatment alternatives should have
been pursued.
The patient's age may be a factor in determining the
restorative material and, consequently, the tooth preparation to be used. With increasing numbers of older
adults in the population, their treatment may pose
restorative considerations. Older adults who have physical or medical complications may require special positioning for restorative treatment as well as shorter, less
stressful appointments. Such considerations may influence the type of procedure planned. Because many older
adults will have new or replacement restorative needs
that are completely or partially on the root surfaces, the
treatment of many of these areas will be more complex.
The prevalence of root-surface restorative needs is increasing significantly. Whether or not adequate isolation of

CHAPTER 6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

the operating site can be obtained may affect the restorative material selection.

quire the same tooth preparation as for nonadhesive
amalgam restorations. Thus the type of tooth preparation is determined by the restorative material used.

CONSERVATION OF TOOTH STRUCTURE
While one of the primary objectives of operative dentistry is to repair the damage from dental caries, the
preservation of the vitality of the tooth is paramount.
Although pulp tolerance to insult is usually favorable,
the pulp should not be subjected to unnecessary abuse
by the application of poor or careless operative procedures on the tooth. The less tooth structure removed,
the less potential damage that may occur to the pulp.
Every effort should be made to make restorations as
small as possible. The smaller the tooth preparation, the
easier it is to retain the restorative material in the tooth.
Small tooth preparations result in restorations that have
less effect on both intraarch and interarch relationships,
as well as esthetics. Naturally, the smaller the tooth preparation, the stronger is the remaining unprepared tooth
structure.
Examples of conservative tooth preparation features
are discussed later in this chapter as well as in the technique chapters of this textbook. Included in those features are concepts relating to: (1) minimal extensions of the
tooth preparations, especially faciolingually and pulpally; (2) supragingival margins; and (3) rounded internal

line angles.
RESTORATIVE MATERIAL FACTORS
The choice of restorative material affects the tooth preparation and is made by considering many factors. The
patient's input into the decision is important. Economic
and esthetic values are primary patient decisions. The
ability to isolate the operating area and the extensiveness of the problem are factors that the operator must
consider in recommending a material or material options
to a patient.
An amalgam restoration requires a specific tooth
preparation form that ensures: (1) retention of the material within the tooth and (2) strength of material in terms
of thickness and marginal form. An indirect cast metal
restoration also requires a specific tooth preparation
form that provides: (1) draw or draft to provide seating
of the rigid restoration, (2) a beveled cavosurface configuration to provide better fit, and (3) retention of the casting by virtue of prepared wall angles and heights.
As already stated, adhesive composite restorations do
not typically require tooth preparations as precise as
those for amalgam and cast metal restorations. Composite does not have low edge strength (as amalgam)
and micromechanically "bonds" to the tooth structure.
These features allow a reduction in the complexity of
the tooth preparation. Other adhesive restorations may
require more precise tooth preparations. Ceramic inlay
restorations do require specific preparation depths and
wall designs but do not require complex cavosurface
marginal configurations. Adhesive amalgams still re-

NOMENCLATURE
Nomenclature refers to a set of terms used in communication by persons in the same profession that enables
them to better understand one another. The prudent
student will master these terms early in the study of
dentistry, since their comprehension will aid in diagnosing and treating disease and defects of the teeth.

CARIES TERMINOLOGY
As stated in Chapter 3, dental caries is an infectious microbiologic disease that results in localized dissolution
and destruction of the calcified tissues of the teeth. Moreover, caries is episodic with alternating phases of demineralization and remineralization, and these processes
may be occurring simultaneously in the same lesion.
Location of Caries. Caries can be described according to location, extent, and rate . 16
Primary Caries. Primary caries is the original carious
lesion of the tooth. The etiology, morphology, control,
and prevention of caries are presented in Chapter 3. Associated with certain areas of the teeth, variations of this
pathologic condition fundamentally influence tooth preparation and therefore should be emphasized. Accordingly, three morphologic types of primary caries are evident
in clinical observation, namely, carious lesions originating: (1) in enamel pits and fissures, (2) on enamel
smooth surfaces, or (3) on root surfaces. Also described
in the following sections are backward caries, forward
caries, and residual caries. Of these, the terms backward
caries and forward caries are rarely used.
Caries of Pit-and-Fissure Origin. Pit-and-fissure caries can form in the regions of pits and fissures usually
resulting from the imperfect coalescence of the developmental enamel lobes. When such areas are exposed to
those oral conditions conducive to caries formation, caries usually develops (Fig. 6-2, A). As caries progresses in
these areas, sometimes very little evidence is clinically
noticeable until the forces of mastication fracture the increasing amount of unsupported enamel. The caries
forms a small area of penetration in the enamel at the
bottom of a pit or fissure and does not spread laterally
to a great extent until the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ) is
reached. At that time, the disintegration spreads along
the junction and begins to penetrate the dentin toward
the pulp via the dentinal tubules. In diagrammatic terms,
pit-and-fissure caries may be represented as two cones,
base to base, with the apex of the enamel cone at the
point of origin and the apex of the dentin cone directed
toward the pulp.
Perfect coalescence of the enamel developmental lobes
is indicated by faultless enamel areas termed grooves and
fossae. Usually these areas are not susceptible to caries
because they are cleansed by the rubbing of food during

CHAPTER 6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

FIG. 6-2 Graphic example of cones of caries (decay) in pit and fissure of tooth (A) and on facial
( B) and proximal (C) surfaces when caries has penetrated approximately same depth into dentin.
Note differences in loss of enamel on external surfaces. D, Sectional view of initial stage of tooth
preparations for lesions in A and B showing cavosurface angle (cs); axial wall (a); pulpal wall (p);
enamel wall (e); dentinal wall (d); margin (m); and dentinoenamel junction (j). Note in upper exploded view that cavosurface angle (cs) can be visualized by imaginary projections (w') of the
preparation wall and (us') of the unprepared surface contiguous with margin, forming angle cs'.
Angles (cs) and (cs') are equal because opposite angles formed at the intersection of two straight
li nes are equal. Likewise, minimal restorative material angle (rm) is equal to angle (rm').
mastication. However, in areas of no masticatory action
in neglected mouths, caries may develop in a groove or
fossa.
Caries of Enamel Smooth-Surface Origin. Smoothsurface caries does not begin in an enamel defect, but
rather in a smooth area of the enamel surface that is habitually unclean, and is thereby continually, or usually,
covered by plaque (see Fig. 6-2, B and C). It is emphasized in Chapter 3 that plaque is necessary for caries,
and that additional oral conditions also must be present
for caries to ensue. The disintegration in the enamel in
smooth-surface caries also may be pictured as a cone,
but with its base on the enamel surface and the apex at,
or directed to, the DEJ. The caries again spreads at this
j unction in the same manner as in pit-and-fissure caries.
Thus, the apex of the cone of caries in the enamel contacts the base of the cone of caries in the dentin.
Backward Caries. When the spread of caries along
the DEJ exceeds the caries in the contiguous enamel,
caries extends into this enamel from the junction and is
termed backward caries (Fig. 6-3).
Forward Caries. Forward caries is wherever the
caries cone in enamel is larger or at least the same size
as that in dentin" (see Fig. 6-2, A).
Residual Caries. Residual caries is caries that remains in a completed tooth preparation, whether by operator intention or by accident. Such caries is not acceptable if at the DEJ or on the prepared enamel tooth

Backward caries

FIG . 6-3 Backward caries extends from DEJ into enamel.
wall (Fig. 6-4, A and B; see also Fig. 17-51). It may be acceptable, however, when it is affected dentin, especially
near the pulp (see Affected and Infected Dentin).
Root-Surface Caries. Root-surface caries may occur
on the tooth root that has been both exposed to the oral

C H A PT E R 6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

FIG . 6-5 Root-surface caries.

FIG. 6-4 Nonacceptable types of residual caries remaining after tooth preparation (A) at dentinoenamel junction and (B) on
enamel wall of tooth preparation. In postoperative radiograph,
B appears similar to secondary (recurrent) caries.

environment and habitually covered with plaque (Fig.
6-5; see also Fig. 9-5, F). Additional oral conditions (discussed in Chapter 3) conducive for caries also must be
present and often are prevalent in the older population.

Root caries is usually more rapid than other forms of caries,
and thus should be detected and treated early. Root caries is
becoming more prevalent because an increasing number of older persons are retaining more of their teeth
and experiencing gingival recession, both of which increase the likelihood of root caries development.
Secondary (Recurrent) Caries. Secondary caries occurs at the junction of a restoration and the tooth and
may progress under the restoration. It is often termed recurrent caries. This condition usually indicates that microleakage is present, along with other conditions conducive to caries (Fig. 6-6; see also Figs. 9-4, D, and 9-8, C).
Extent of Caries
Incipient Caries (Reversible). Incipient caries is the
first evidence of caries activity in the enamel. On
smooth surface enamel, the lesion appears opaque
white when air-dried, and will seem to disappear (not
be distinguishable from contiguous unaffected enamel)
if wetted. (See white spot [ws] in Fig. 9-5, D.) This lesion
of demineralized enamel has not extended to the DEJ,
and the enamel surface is fairly hard and still intact
(smooth to the touch). The lesion can be remineralized if
immediate corrective measures alter the oral environment, including plaque removal and control. This le-

sion, then, may be characterized as reversible. A remineralized lesion usually is either opaque white, or a shade
of brown-to-black from extrinsic coloration, has a hard
surface, and appears the same whether wet or dry (see
brown spot [bs] in Fig. 9-14, C).
Cavitated Caries (Nonreversible). In cavitated caries,
the enamel surface is broken (not intact), and usually
the lesion has advanced into dentin. Usually remineralization is not possible (see Fig. 9-5, E) and treatment by
tooth preparation and restoration is often indicated.
Rate (Speed) of Caries
Acute (Rampant) Caries. Acute caries, often termed
rampant caries, is when the disease is rapid in damaging the tooth. It is usually in the form of many, soft,
light-colored lesions in a mouth and is infectious (see
Fig. 9-5, E). Less time for extrinsic pigmentation explains the lighter coloration.
Chronic (Slow or Arrested) Caries. Chronic caries
is slow, or it may be arrested following several active
phases. The slow rate results from periods when demineralized tooth structure is almost remineralized (the
disease is episodic over time because of changes in the
oral environment). The condition may be in only a few
locations in a mouth, and the lesion is discolored and
fairly hard (see Fig. 9-19, C). The slow rate of caries allows time for extrinsic pigmentation. An arrested
enamel lesion is brown-to-black, hard, and as a result
of fluoride, may be more caries-resistant than contiguous, unaffected enamel (see Fig. 9-14, C [bs]). An arrested, dentinal lesion typically is "open" (allowing debridement from toothbrushing), dark and hard, and
this dentin is termed sclerotic or eburnated dentin (see
Fig. 9-19, A [a] and B).
Grooves and Fissures; Fossae and Pits. On the
enamel surface, grooves or fissures mark the location of
the union of developmental enamel lobes (see Fig. 2-2).
Where such union is complete, this "landmark" is only
slightly involuted, smooth, hard, shallow, accessible to
cleansing, and is termed a groove. (Note in Fig. 2-2 on the
upper left illustration the good coalescence of the facial
cusps to form an occlusofacial groove.) Where such
union is incomplete, the landmark is sharply involuted
to form a narrow, inaccessible canal of varying depths in

CHAPTER 6

Secondary caries

FIG . 6-6 Secondary (recurrent) caries.

the enamel and is termed a fissure (note in Fig. 2-2 on the
upper left illustration the mesial portion of the central
fissure). A fissure may be a trap for plaque and other oral
elements that together can produce caries, unless the surface enamel of the canal is fluoride rich (see Fig. 2-12).
Caries-preventive treatment of fissured enamel is presented in Chapter 3; and corrective treatments are discussed in this chapter and subsequent technique chapters.
The distinction made between a groove and a fissure
also applies to an enamel surface fossa that is nondefective and a pit that is defective.
Extension for Prevention, Enameloplasty, Sealant,
and Preventive Resin or Conservative Composite
Restoration. Black 4 noted that, in tooth preparations for

smooth-surface caries, the restoration should be extended to areas that are normally self-cleansing to prevent recurrence of caries. This principle was known as
extension for prevention and was broadened to include
the extension necessary to remove remaining enamel
defects, such as pits and fissures.
However, the practice of extension for prevention on
smooth surfaces virtually has been eliminated because
of the relative caries immunity provided by preventive
measures, such as fluoride, improved oral hygiene, and
proper diet. This has fostered a more conservative philosophy defining the factors that dictate extension on
smooth surfaces to be the extent of caries or injury and
the restorative material to be used.
Likewise, extension for prevention to include the full
length of enamel fissures has been reduced by treatments that conserve tooth structure; therefore restored
teeth are stronger and more resistant to fracture. Such
treatments are enameloplasty (see Fig. 17-8), application
of pit-and-fissure sealant (see Fig. 13-3), and the preven(see Fig. 13-5), or conservative composite
tive resin
restoration (see Fig. 13-17).
Enameloplasty is removal of a shallow, enamel developmental fissure or pit to create a smooth, saucer-shaped
surface that is self-cleansing or easily cleaned. Not only

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

can this prophylactic procedure be applied to fissures
and pits and deep supplemental grooves, but also to
some shallow, smooth-surface enamel defects. More details regarding enameloplasty are presented later. Pitand-fissure sealant application does not require any
tooth preparation and is a preferred preventive method.
For more advanced lesions, the preventive resin or conservative composite restoration may be used, whereby a
small rotary cutting instrument or air abrasion is used to
prepare fissures and pits, which are subsequently restored with composite and sealant (see Chapter 13).
Prophylactic Odontotomy. Prophylactic odontotomy22 is presented only as a historical concept characterized by minimally preparing and filling with amalgam, developmental, structural imperfections of the
enamel, such as pits and fissures, to prevent caries originating in these sites. It is no longer advocated as a preventive measure.
Affected and Infected Dentin. Fusayama has re-

ported that carious dentin consists of two distinct layers, an outer and an inner. This textbook refers to the
outer layer as infected dentin (zones 4 and 5 discussed in
Chapter 3) and the inner layer as affected dentin (zones 2
and 3 discussed in Chapter 3). In tooth preparation, it is
desirable that only infected dentin be removed, leaving the affected dentin, which then may be remineralized in a vital
tooth following the completion of restorative treatment. This

principle for the removal of dentinal caries is supported
by Fusayama's observation that the softening front of
the lesion always precedes the discoloration front,
which in turn always precedes the bacterial fronds (Figs.
6-7 and 6-8).
Infected dentin has bacteria present and the collagen
is irreversibly denatured. It is not remineralizable and
must be removed. Affected dentin has no bacteria, is reversibly denatured, remineralizable, and should be preserved. To distinguish clinically between these two layers, the operator traditionally both observes the degree
of discoloration (extrinsic staining) and tests the area for
hardness by the feel of an explorer tine or a slowly revolving bur. Some difficulties occur with this approach
because: (1) the discoloration may be very slight and
gradually changeable in acute (rapid) caries, and (2) the
hardness (softness) felt by the hand through an instrument may be an inexact guide. To differentiate between
remineralizable and nonremineralizable dentin, staining carious dentin was proposed many years ago by
Fusayamaa"Use of these materials is more appropriate
for very deep excavations. Many caries-staining products are available and are becoming more widely used.
In chronic (slow) caries, infected dentin usually is discolored and, because the bacterial front is close to the
discoloration front, it is advisable in caries removal to
remove all discolored dentin unless judged to be within
0.5 mm of the pulp (Fig. 6-9). Because in acute (rapid)
caries the discoloration is very slight and the bacterial

CHAPTER 6

Fundamentais in Tooth Preparation

FIG 6-7 Bacteria in dentinal tubules in the bacterial front of a
carious lesion. (Courtesy of Takao Fusayama and the Journal
of Dental Research.)

FIG . 6-8 Series of Knoop indentations parallel and oblique to
dentinal tubules. (E), Dentinoenamel junction; (B) bacterial invasion front; (D), discoloration front; (S), softening front; (P),
pulp chamber wall. (Courtesy of Takao Fusayama and the
Journal of Dental Research.)

front is well behind the discoloration front, some discolored dentin may be left, although any "clinically remarkable" discoloration should be removed. 15

tures occur as the cervical area of the tooth flexes under
such loads. This defect is termed idiopathic erosion or
abfraction (see Fig. 9-11, C).
Attrition. Attrition is mechanical wear of the incisal
or occlusal surface as a result of functional or parafunctional movements of the mandible (tooth-to-tooth contacts) (see Fig. 9-11, E). Attrition also includes proximal
surface wear at the contact area because of physiologic
tooth movement.
Fractures. One of the more difficult and challenging
defects of teeth, in both diagnosis and treatment, are
fractures (see Figs. 9-12 and 9-18). The following types
of fracture may occur.

NONCARIOLIS TOOTH DEFECTS TERMINOLOGY
Abrasion. Abrasion is abnormal tooth surface loss resulting from direct friction forces between the teeth and
external objects, or from frictional forces between contacting teeth components in the presence of an abrasive
medium. Abrasion may occur from (1) improper brushing techniques, (2) habits such as holding a pipe stem by
the teeth, (3) tobacco chewing, or (4) vigorous use of
toothpicks between adjacent teeth. Toothbrush abrasion
is the most common example and is usually seen as a
sharp, V-shaped notch in the gingival portion of the facial aspect of a tooth (see Fig. 9-11, D).
Erosion. Erosion is the wear or loss of tooth surface
by chemicomechanical action (see Fig. 9-11, A and B).
Regurgitation of stomach acid can cause this condition
on the lingual surfaces of maxillary teeth (particularly
anterior teeth). Other examples are the dissolution of
the facial aspects of anterior teeth because of habitual
sucking of lemons or the loss of tooth surface from ingestion of acidic medicines.
Abfraction. Recently, it has been proposed that the
predominant causative factor of some of the cervical,
wedge-shaped defects is a strong (heavy) eccentric occlusal force (shown as an associated wear facet) resulting in microfractures or abfractures. Such microfrac-

Incomplete Fracture Not Directly Involving (Not
Into) Vital Pulp. An incomplete fracture not directly in-

volving a vital pulp is often termed a greenstick fracture.
This condition is very sensitive, yet the patient can only
specify which side of the mouth is affected rather than
the specific tooth. It is most challenging to diagnose and
treat (see Chapter 9 and Fig. 9-18).
Complete Fracture Not Involving (Not Into) Vital

Pulp. Usually, pain is not associated with this condition
(see Fig. 9-12), unless the gingival border of the fractured
segment is still held by periodontal tissue. Restorative
treatment (sometimes also periodontal) is indicated.
Fracture Involving (Into) Vital Pulp. This condition
always results in pulpal infection and severe pain. If the
tooth is restorable, immediate root canal therapy is indicated; otherwise the tooth must be extracted.

CHAPTER

6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

FIG 6-9 Graphs comparing acute and chronic caries regarding closeness, hardness, and depth
factors of the softening, discoloration, and bacterial invasion fronts. (Courtesy of Takao
Fusayama.)
Nonhereditary Enamel Hypoplasia. Nonhereditary
enamel hypoplasia occurs when the ameloblasts are inj ured during enamel formation, resulting in defective
enamel (diminished form and/or calcification). It usually is seen on anterior teeth and first molars in the form
of opaque white or light brown areas with smooth intact, hard surface (see Fig. 15-1, B), or of pitted or
grooved enamel, which is usually hard and discolored
and caused by fluorosis or high fever (see Fig. 15-34).
The reader is referred to a textbook on oral pathology
for additional information.
Amelogenesis Imperfecta. In amelogenesis imperfecta, the enamel is defective either in form or calcification as a result of heredity and has an appearance ranging from essentially normal to extremely unsightly 34
Dentinogenesis Imperfecta. Dentinogenesis imperfecta is a hereditary condition in which only the dentin
is defective. Normal enamel is weakly attached and lost
early. The reader is referred to a textbook on oral
pathology.
TOOTH PREPARATION TERMINOLOGY

A prerequisite to the comprehension of terms in either
tooth preparation or classification (following section) is
a knowledge of all terms of tooth description as presented in dental anatomy, including the names and positions of tooth surfaces.
Simple, Compound, and Complex Tooth Preparations. A tooth preparation is termed simple if only one
tooth surface is involved (see Fig. 6-12), compound if
two surfaces are involved (see Fig. 6-15), and complex
for a preparation involving three (or more) surfaces
(see Fig. 19-1).
Abbreviated Descriptions of Tooth Preparations.
For brevity in records and communication, the descrip-

I nternal
walls:

External
walls:

Cementoenamel
j unction (CEJ)
Floors (or seats) are the gingival
and pulpal walls
FIG. 6-10 Illustration indicating external and internal walls.
tion of a tooth preparation is abbreviated by using the
first letter, capitalized, of each tooth surface involved.
Examples are: (1) an occlusal tooth preparation is an O
(see Fig. 6-12); (2) a preparation involving the mesial
and occlusal surfaces is an MO (see Fig. 6-15); and (3) a
preparation involving the mesial, occlusal, and distal
surfaces is an MOD (see Fig. 19-1).
Tooth Preparation Walls
Internal Wall. An internal wall is a prepared (cut)
surface that does not extend to the external tooth surface (Fig. 6-10).
Axial wall. An axial wall is an internal wall parallel
with the long axis of the tooth (see Fig. 6-10).
Pulpal wall. A pulpal wall is an internal wall that is
both perpendicular to the long axis of the tooth and occlusal of the pulp (see Figs. 6-10 and 6-13 [p]).
External Wall. An external wall is a prepared (cut)
surface that extends to the external tooth surface, and

CHAPTER 6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

such a wall takes the name of the tooth surface (or aspect) that the wall is toward (see Fig. 6-10).
Floor (or Seat). A floor (or seat) is a prepared (cut)
wall that is reasonably flat and perpendicular to those
occlusal forces that are directed occlusogingivally (generally parallel to the long axis of the tooth). Examples are
the pulpal and gingival walls (see Fig. 6-10). Such floors
may be purposefully prepared to provide stabilizing
seats for the restoration, thus distributing the stresses in
the tooth structure, rather than concentrating them. This
increases the resistance form of the restored tooth against
postrestorative fracture. More regarding this type of resistance form is presented in a later section.
Enamel Wall. The enamel wall is that portion of a
prepared external wall consisting of enamel (see Fig.
6-2, D).
Dentinal Wall. The dentinal wall is that portion of a
prepared external wall consisting of dentin, in which mechanical retention features may be located (see Fig. 6-2, D).
Tooth Preparation Angles. Although the junction of
two or more prepared (cut) surfaces is referred to as an
angle, in fact, the junction is almost always "softened"
so as to present a slightly rounded configuration (the exception being a tooth preparation for gold foil). In spite
of this rounding, these junctions are still referred to as
angles for descriptive and communicative purposes.
Line Angle. A line angle is the junction of two planal
surfaces of different orientation along a line (see Fig.
6-14). An internal line angle is a line angle whose apex
points into the tooth (see Fig. 6-14, ffpl). An external line
angle is a line angle whose apex points away from the
tooth (see Fig. 6-17, [ap]).
Point Angle. A point angle is the junction of three
planal surfaces of different orientation (see Fig. 6-14,
(mfpl ).

Cavosurface Angle and Cavosurface Margin. The
cavosurface angle is the angle of tooth structure formed

by the junction of a prepared (cut) wall and the external
surface of the tooth (see Fig. 6-2, D, [cs]). The actual
j unction is referred to as the cavosurface margin (see Fig.
6-2, [m]). The cavosurface angle may differ with the location on the tooth, the direction of the enamel rods on
the prepared wall, or the type of restorative material to
be used. This subject is discussed in greater detail later
in this chapter and also in later chapters dealing with
tooth preparations for different restorative materials. It
should be noted in Fig. 6-2, D, that the cavosurface angle (cs) is determined by projecting the prepared (cut)
wall in an imaginary line (w') and the unprepared
enamel surface in an imaginary line (us') and noting the
angle (cs') opposite to the cavosurface angle (cs). (Recall
that when two straight lines intersect, the opposite angles are equal). For better visualization, these imaginary
projections can be formed by using two periodontal
probes, one lying on the unprepared surface and the
other on the prepared external tooth wall (Fig. 6-11).

Minimal restorative
material angle

FIG 6-11 Visualization of cavosurface angle and associated
minimal restorative material angle.

Combination of terms. When discussing or writing
a term denoting a combination of two or more surfaces,
the al ending of the prefix word is changed to an o. Thus

the angle formed by the lingual and incisal surfaces of
an anterior tooth would be termed the linguoincisal line
angle. A tooth preparation involving the mesial and occlusal surfaces is termed a mesioocclusal preparation, or
an MO preparation (see Fig. 6-15); and a preparation involving mesial, occlusal, and distal surfaces is a mesioocclusodistal tooth preparation, or an MOD preparation
(see Fig. 19-1). When referring to a combination of tooth
preparation walls (i.e., stating line angles or point angles), the same nomenclature principle is used (see Figs.
6-13 and 6-14).
Dentinoenamel Junction. The DEJ is the junction of
the enamel and dentin (see Fig. 6-2, D).
Cementoenamel Junction. The cementoenamel junction (CEJ) is the junction of the enamel and cementum
(see Fig. 6-10). It also is referred to as the cervical line.
Sometimes the enamel and cementum do not actually
join, thereby leaving a narrow region of exposed dentin.
Enamel Margin Strength. One of the more important principles in tooth preparation is the concept of the
strongest enamel margin. This margin has two significant
features: (1) it is formed by full-length enamel rods
whose inner ends are on sound dentin, and (2) these
enamel rods are buttressed on the preparation side by
progressively shorter rods whose outer ends have been
cut off but whose inner ends are on sound dentin (see
Figs. 6-1, D, and 17-6, B). Because enamel rods usually
are perpendicular to the enamel surface, the strongest
enamel margin results in a cavosurface angle greater
than 90 degrees.
An enamel margin composed of full-length rods that
are on sound dentin but are not buttressed tooth-side by
shorter rods also on sound dentin is termed strong (but

CHAPTER 6

not the strongest). Generally, this margin will result in a
90-degree cavosurface angle (see Fig. 17-48, C.
An enamel margin composed of rods that do not run
uninterrupted from the surface to sound dentin is
termed unsupported, and this marginal enamel tends to
split or fracture off, leaving a V-shaped ditch along the
margin of a restoration (see Fig. 2-4, A). Usually, this
weak enamel margin either has a cavosurface angle less
than 90 degrees or no dentinal support.

Vertical (Longitudinal) and Horizontal (Transverse)
Terminology. It is customary through habitual use to describe tooth preparation features or sections that are parallel (or nearly so) to the long axis of the tooth crown as
vertical, such as vertical height of cusps, or vertical walls.
However, sometimes the term longitudinal may be used
in lieu of vertical. Tooth preparation features that are perpendicular (or nearly so) to the long axis of the tooth are
termed horizontal, although sometimes referred to as
transverse. When the terms vertical (longitudinal) and horizontal (transverse) are first used in a chapter, the parenthetical alternate may be included, but not thereafter.

I ntracoronal and Extracoronal Tooth Preparations.
An intracoronal tooth preparation is usually "boxlike,"
having both internal and external preparation walls (see
Fig. 6-10). With a conservative tooth preparation for
treatment of a small lesion, much of the tooth crown, as
well as crown surface, is not involved. Nevertheless, the
remaining tooth usually is weakened, and the restoration may or may not restore the tooth strength.
Conversely, the extracoronal preparation is usually
"stumplike," having walls or surfaces that result from
removal of most to all of the enamel. The extracoronal
restoration, termed a crown, envelops the remaining
tooth crown and thereby usually restores some of its
strength. This textbook does not include extracoronal
tooth preparation for crown restorations. However, included in Chapter 20 are cast metal onlay restorations that
by design, encompass the transitional vertical tooth corners (line angles) and thereby strengthen the tooth
against postrestorative fracture.

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

locations may have changed over the years, the original
classification is still used, and the various classes also are
used to identify restorations (i.e., a Class I amalgam restoration). This method of classification is used throughout
this textbook.
Also used in this textbook is a classification of tooth
preparations that primarily relates to a comparison between the more historical tooth preparation (conventional)
and alterations from that type of preparation. The altered
preparation designs are referred to as: (1) beveled conventional preparations and (2) modified preparations. Much
of the detailed description of tooth preparation in this
chapter focuses on conventional designs, although appropriate differences with the other two designs also are presented in this chapter and in the technique chapters. The
conventional design preparation is typical for an amalgam
restoration and includes the following characteristics:
(1) uniform pulpal and/or axial wall depths, (2) cavosurface margin design that results in a 90-degree restoration
margin, and (3) primary retention form derived from
occlusally converging vertical walls. Beveled conventional
designs are characterized as conventional preparations
with beveling of some accessible enamel margins.
Modified preparation designs may not have uniform axial
or pulpal depths or occlusally converging vertical walls.
Furthermore, thin cavosurface margins may result in more
acute angles in the restoration. Amalgam tooth preparations only use conventional designs, whereas composite
preparations may be any of the three designs.
Class I Restorations. All pit-and-fissure restorations
are Class I, and they are assigned to three groups, as
follows.
Restorations on Occlusal Surface of Premolars
and Molars. The names of the walls, line angles, and

point angles of an occlusal conventional tooth preparation are identified by the labels and legends in Figs.
6-12, 6-13, and 6-14, noting again that a preparation
takes the name of the tooth surface (or aspect) that the
wall is toward.

Anatomic Tooth Crown and Clinical Tooth Crown.

Restorations on Occlusal Two Thirds of the Facial
and Lingual Surfaces of Molars. The names of the

The anatomic tooth crown is the portion of the tooth
covered by enamel. The clinical tooth crown is the portion of the tooth exposed to the oral cavity.

walls, line angles, and point angles of these tooth preparations are the same as those depicted for the preparations for Class V restorations (see later section).

CLASSIFICATION OF TOOTH PREPARATIONS

Restorations on Lingual Surface of Maxillary Incisors. The names of the walls, line angles, and point an-

Classification of tooth preparations according to the anatomic areas involved as well as by the associated type of
treatment was presented by Black and is designated as
Class I, Class II, Class III, Class IV, and Class V 4 Since
Black's original classification, an additional class has
been added, Class VI. Class I refers to pit-and-fissure lesions, whereas the remaining classes are smooth-surface
lesions. Classification was originally based on the observed frequency of carious lesions on certain aspects of
the tooth. Even though the relative frequency of caries

gles of these tooth preparations also are the same as
those depicted for the preparations for Class V restorations (see later section).
Class II Restorations. Restorations on the proximal
surfaces of posterior teeth are Class II. A proximoocclusal (MO) conventional preparation illustrates and
designates walls, line angles, and point angles (Figs.
6-15, 6-16, and 6-17). A distoocclusal preparation has
the same walls, line angles, and point angles, except
the distal wall (in the MO) is a mesial wall (in the DO);

CHAPTER6

Fundamentais in Tooth Preparation

FIG 6-12 Typical Class I tooth preparation for amalgam on maxillary premolar.

f I G 6-13 Schematic representation (for
descriptive purpose) of Fig. 6-12 illustrati ng tooth preparation walls: facial (f), distal (d), lingual (I), mesial (m), and pulpal (p).

f I G . 6-14 Schematic representation (for
descriptive purpose) of Fig. 6-12 illustrati ng tooth preparation line angles and
point angles. Line angles are faciopulpal
(pp, distofacial (df), distopulpal (dp), distol i ngual (dl), linguopulpal (Ip), mesiolingual
(ml), mesiopulpal (mp), and mesiofacial
(mf). Point angles are distofaciopulpal
(dfp), distolinguopulpal (dlp), mesiolinguopulpal (mlp), and mesiofaciopulpal (mfp).

FIG 6-15 Typical Class II mesioocclusal
conventional tooth preparation for amalgam on maxillary premolar.

FIG . 6-16 Schematic representation (for
descriptive purpose) of Fig. 6-15 illustrati ng tooth preparation walls: facial (f) of
proximal and occlusal portions, gingival
(g), lingual (I) of proximal and occlusal
portions, distal (d), pulpal (p), and axial (a).

FIG. 6-17 Schematic representation (for
descriptive purpose) of Fig. 6-15 illustrati ng tooth preparation line angles and
point angles. Line angles are distofacial
(df), faciopulpal (fp), axiofacial (af), faciogingival (fg), axiogingival (ag), linguogingival (Ig), axiolingual (al), axiopulpal (ap),
l i nguopulpal (Ip), distolingual (dl), and
distopulpal (dp). Point angles are distofaciopulpal (dfp), axiofaciopulpal (afp), axi ofaciogingival (afg), axiolinguogingival
(alg), axiolinguopulpal (alp), and distolinguopulpal (dip).

CHAPTER 6

FIG.6-18 Class III conventional tooth preparation on maxillary central incisor.

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

FIG 6-19 Schematic representation (for descriptive purpose) of Fig. 6-18 illustrating
tooth preparation walls: facial (f), lingual
(p, gingival (g), and axial (a).

and the line angles and point angles relating to a distal wall (in the MO) relate to a mesial wall (in the DO).
An MOD preparation has similar walls, line angles,
and point angles, but there is neither a mesial wall nor
a distal wall, and therefore line angles and point angles associated with mesial and distal walls are not
present.
Class III Restorations. Restorations on the proximal
surfaces of anterior teeth that do not involve the incisal
angle are Class III. Walls, line angles, and point angles of
a representative conventional tooth preparation are
identified in Figs. 6-18, 6-19, and 6-20. Note that the faciolingual line angle at the incisal is termed the incisal
line angle; likewise, the faciolinguoincisal point angle is
termed the axioincisal point angle.
Class IV Restorations. Restorations on the proximal
surfaces of anterior teeth that do involve the incisal edge
are Class IV. Walls, line angles, and point angles of a representative conventional tooth preparation are identified in Figs. 6-21, 6-22, and 6-23.
Class V Restorations. Restorations on the gingival
third of the facial or lingual surfaces of all teeth (except
pit-and-fissure lesions) are Class V. Walls, line angles,
and point angles of a representative conventional tooth
preparation on an anterior tooth are designated in Figs.
6-24, 6-25, and 6-26. For posterior teeth the incisal (i) becomes occlusal (o).

FIG . 6-20 Schematic representation (for descriptive purpose) of Fig. 6-18 illustrating
tooth preparation line angles and point
angles. Line angles are axiolingual (al),
li nguogingival (Ig), axiogingival (ag), faciogingival (fg), axiofacial (af), and incisal
(i). Point angles are axiolinguogingival
(alg), axiofaciogingival (afg), and axioincisal (ai). (Note that names for incisal line
angle and point angle are exceptions to
the general naming rule.)

Class VI Restorations. Restorations on the incisal
edge of anterior teeth or the occlusal cusp heights of
posterior teeth are Class VI. Walls, line angles, and point
angles of these tooth preparations are the same as those
depicted for the preparations of occlusal pit-and-fissure
lesions.

I NITIAL AND FINAL STAGES OF
TOOTH PREPARATION
Proper tooth preparation is accomplished through systematic procedures based on definite physical and mechanical principles. Also, the differences between clinically manifested physiologic and pathologic processes
of teeth and supporting tissues must be recognized.
Moreover, the physical properties and capabilities of the
different restorative materials must be appreciated. All
of these are determining factors in understanding proper
tooth preparation. Without this background knowledge,
plus additional information concerning the mechanics of
cutting and patient management, the exercise of proper
j udgment for efficient and proper tooth preparation cannot be achieved.
As stated earlier, the tooth preparation procedure is
divided into two stages, each with several steps. Each
stage should be thoroughly understood, and each step
should be accomplished as perfectly as possible. There
are occasions, however, when the sequence is altered,

C H A PT E R

6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

FIG .6-21 Class IV conventional tooth preparation for inlay on maxillary canine.

Schematic representation (for descriptive purpose) of Fig. 6-21 illustrating
tooth preparation walls: facial (f) of proxi mal and incisal portions, gingival (g), lingual (I) of proximal and incisal portions,
axial (a), and mesial (m).

f I G . 6-22

but this is the exception and not the general rule (see
Caries Control Restoration in Chapter 3). The stages are
presented in the sequence in which they should be followed if consistent, ideal results are to be obtained. The
division of the procedure into two stages also assists in
assessing students' understanding and ability to properly execute the preparation. In an academic setting, the
student should be instructed to accomplish the initial
stage first. An evaluation of this stage should then occur
before any steps in the final stage are initiated.
The stages and steps in tooth preparation are:
Initial Tooth Preparation Stage
Step 1: Outline form and initial depth
Step 2: Primary resistance form
Step 3: Primary retention form
Step 4: Convenience form
Final Tooth Preparation Stage
Step 5: Removal of any remaining infected dentin and/
or old restorative material, if indicated
Step 6: Pulp protection, if indicated
Step 7: Secondary resistance and retention forms

f I C . 6-23 Schematic representation (for descriptive purpose) of Fig. 6-21 illustrating
tooth preparation line and point angles.
Line angles are mesiofacial (mf), faciopulpal (fp), axiofacial (af), faciogingival (fg),
axiogingival (ag), linguogingival (Ig), axiol i ngual (al), axiopulpal (ap), linguopulpal
(Ip), mesiolingual (ml), and mesiopulpal
( mp). Point angles are mesiofaciopulpal
(mfp), axiofaciopulpal (app, axiofaciogingival (afg), axiolinguogingival (alg), axioli nguopulpal (alp), and mesiolinguopulpal (mlp).

Step 8: Procedures for finishing external walls
Step 9: Final procedures: cleaning, inspecting, sealing
As stated earlier, under certain circumstances this sequence is changed, such as extensive caries that may involve the pulp. Then it may be advisable to remove infected dentin earlier in the procedure. When this becomes
necessary, it also is important to place the desired liner
and/or base in the preparation at this time, especially if a
pulp capping procedure is necessary (see Chapter 3).
Normally, however, much of the caries is removed in
completing the initial tooth preparation and any remaining infected dentin is removed later in the final stage.
Specific procedures and instrumentation are discussed in detail in later chapters that present the various
classes of restorations in conjunction with the use of different restorative materials. The discussion in this section
is concerned with what should be accomplished and why, and
not specifically how it should be accomplished.
Before any restorative procedure can be undertaken,
the environment in which the procedure will be done
must be readied. Most restorative materials require a moisture-free environment; otherwise, the physical properties of
the material are compromised. Chapter 10 of this textbook
presents the methods of field isolation, ensuring maxi-

CHAPTER6

FIG . 6-24 Class
preparation.

V

conventional

tooth

FIG . 6-25 Schematic representation (for descriptive purpose) of Fig. 6-24 illustrating
tooth preparation walls: mesial (m), gingival (g), distal (d), incisal (i) (or occlusal
[o] if preparation on posterior tooth), and
axial (a).

mum effectiveness of the restorative material. In most
cases, the use of the rubber dam best assures the correct
isolation. Some operators prefer to place the rubber dam
after the initial stage of tooth preparation but before excavating infected dentin and placing secondary retentive features.
Also, the treatment and management of the remainder
of the oral environment must be considered. Protecting
the contiguous soft tissues in the operating site must be a pri-

Oral mucosa, lips, cheek, and tongue
should be protected against deleterious effects from substances placed in the mouth during a restorative procedure as well as from possible mechanical injury caused
by the procedure. Likewise, these tissues must be treated
carefully so as not to cause any lasting harm. This requires specific actions that will provide appropriate soft
tissue response. Proper manipulation of the gingiva requires appropriate use of retraction cord, protection by
wedge placement, and development of restoration contours that engender postoperative gingival health. For
years, it was recommended that restoration margins be
extended into the gingival sulcus, a region thought to be
immune to recurrent caries. It is now accepted that the
gingival sulcus is not immune to recurrent caries. Moreover, soft tissue responds negatively to margins placed
mary objective.

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

in the crevice.

FIG . 6-26 Schematic representation (for descriptive purpose) of Fig. 6-24 illustrating
tooth preparation line angles and point
angles. Line angles are mesioincisal (mi)
( or mesioocclusal ImoD, axiomesial (am),
mesiogingival (mg), axiogingival (ag), distogingival (dg), axiodistal (ad), distoincisal
( di) ( or distoocclusal ldoD, and axioincisal
(ai) (or axioocclusal IaoD. Point angles are
axiomesioincisal (ami), ( or axiomesioocclusal lamoD, axiomesiogingival (amg),
axiodistogingival (adg), and axiodistoincisal (adi) (or axiodistoocclusal ladoD.

Therefore margins should be limited to supra-

Obviously, the less the
gingival tissue is affected by the restoration, the less
likely future gingival harm will be caused by either the
operative procedure or the restoration contour. Also, and
j ust as important, less extension gingivally is more conservative of tooth structure, leaving the tooth stronger.
Specific factors that best assure proper soft tissue health
both during and after a restorative procedure are presented in the chapters describing the various operative
restorative techniques.
gingival locations whenever possible.

I NITIAL TOOTH PREPARATION STAGE
As stated earlier,

initial tooth preparation is the extension

and initial design of the external walls of the preparation at a
specified, limited depth so as to provide access to the caries or
defect, reach sound tooth structure (except for later removal of
infected dentin on the pulpal or axial walls), resist fracture of
the tooth or restorative material from masticatory forces principally directed with the long axis of the tooth, and retain the

(except for the Class V
preparation). The preparation is extended internally no
deeper than 0.2 mm (0.5 mm when restoring with direct
gold) into dentin for pit-and-fissure lesions and 0.2 to
0.8 mm into dentin for smooth-surface lesions (the
restorative material in the tooth

CHAPTER 6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

greater on root surfaces; see Fig. 6-1). This may necessitate additional deepening of the preparation in the excavation of any remaining faulty tooth structure, faulty
old restorative material, or infected dentin during the final stage of tooth preparation. In this way, the operator
can maximize the use of the preparation instrumentation before making changes and can perform the final
preparation techniques with better access and visibility.
However, when the carious lesion is very extensive, the
sequence of these steps is altered to determine the pulpal involvement and protect the pulpal tissue as early in
the procedure as possible. The steps in initial tooth preparation are: (1) developing the outline form and initial
depth, (2) establishing primary resistance form, (3) establishing primary retention form, and (4) providing
convenience form. These steps are discussed in detail in
the following sections. Although these are listed as individual steps, in practice they often occur simultaneously.
Step 1: Outline Form and Initial Depth. The first step
in initial tooth preparation is determining and developing the outline form while establishing the initial depth.
Definition. Establishing the outline form means:
(1) placing the preparation margins in the positions they
will occupy in the final preparation, except for finishing
enamel walls and margins, and (2) preparing an initial
depth of 0.2 to 0.8 mm pulpally of the DEJ position or
normal root-surface position (no deeper initially whether

in tooth structure, air, old restorative material, or caries
unless the occlusal enamel thickness is minimal and
greater dimension is necessary for strength of the
restorative material). The greater depth is for extensions onto the root surface. Otherwise, the depth into
dentin is not to exceed 0.2 to 0.5 mm, the deeper dimension necessary when placing secondary retention (see
Fig. 6-1). The outline form must be visualized before
any mechanical alteration to the tooth is begun. Occasionally, extensive caries, fractured enamel, and other
conditions may prevent an accurate preoperative mental visualization at the onset of tooth preparation, although a dentist with sufficient clinical experience usually can do this. With the principles governing the
outline form as a background, this preoperative visualization of the outline form acts as a deterrent to overcutting and overextension, which very often cause weak
remaining tooth structure and an unesthetic restoration.
Thus, it is very important to preoperatively assess the
proposed tooth preparation extensions before mechanical removal of any tooth structure, chiefly enamel.
Principles. The three general principles, not without
exception, on which outline form is established regardless of the type of tooth preparation being prepared are:
(1) all friable and/or weakened enamel should be removed (recall previous Nomenclature section, Enamel
Margin Strength), (2) all faults should be included, and
(3) all margins should be placed in a position to afford
good finishing of the margins of the restoration. The

third principle has ramifications that differ for pit-andfissure preparations as compared with smooth-surface
preparations.
Factors. In determining the outline form of a proposed tooth preparation, certain conditions or factors
must first be assessed. These conditions affect the outline form and often dictate the extensions. Obviously
the extent of the carious lesion, defect, or faulty old restoration affects the outline form of the proposed tooth preparation because the objective is to extend to sound tooth
structure, except in a pulpal direction. There is one extension exception: occasionally, a tooth preparation outline
for a new restoration will contact or extend slightly into
a sound, existing restoration (e.g., a new MO abutting a
sound DO; see Fig. 17-65, A and B). This is sometimes an

acceptable practice (i.e, to have a margin of a new restoration
placed into an existing, sound restoration).
In addition to these factors, esthetic and occlusal conditions affect the proposed preparation. Esthetic considerations not only affect the choice of restorative material,
but also the design of the tooth preparation in an effort
to maximize the esthetic result of the restoration. Correcting or improving occlusal relationships also may necessitate altering the tooth preparation to accommodate
such changes, even when the involved tooth structure is
not faulty (i.e., perhaps a cuspal form must be altered to
effect better occlusal relationships). Likewise, the adjacent tooth contour may dictate specific preparation extensions that both secure appropriate proximal relationships and provide the restored tooth with optimal form
and strength. Lastly, the desired cavosurface marginal configuration of the proposed restoration affects the outline
form. Restorative materials that are more effective when
having beveled margins require tooth preparation outline form extensions that must anticipate the final cavosurface position and form. All of these factors are discussed in subsequent chapters that present the clinical
techniques for the various operative restorations.
Features. Generally the six specific, typical features
of establishing proper outline form and initial depth
are: (1) preserving cuspal strength, (2) preserving marginal ridge strength, (3) minimizing faciolingual extensions, (4) using enameloplasty, (5) connecting two close
(less than 0.5 mm apart) faults or tooth preparations,
and (6) restricting the depth of the preparation into
dentin to a maximum of 0.2 mm for pit-and-fissure
caries and 0.2 to 0.8 mm for the axial wall of smoothsurface caries (the greater depth indicated only for an
extension gingivally onto the root surface). These features are discussed as they relate to both pit-and-fissure
cavities and smooth surface cavities.

Outline form and initial depth for pit-and fissure
lesions. Outline form and initial depth in pit-andfissure preparations are controlled by three factors:
(1) the extent to which the enamel has been involved by
the carious process, (2) the extensions that must be

CHAPTER 6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

made along the fissures to achieve sound and smooth
margins, and (3) the limited bur depth related to the
tooth's original surface (real, or visualized if missing because of disease or defect) while extending the preparation to sound external walls that have a pulpal depth of
approximately 1.5 to 2 mm and usually a maximum
depth into dentin of 0.2 mm (see Fig. 6-1, A and B). It
should be noted in Fig. 6-1, A, that this depth measured
in relation to the location of the fissure itself is 1.5 mm.

4. Extend the preparation margin to include all of the
fissure that cannot be eliminated by appropriate
enameloplasty (Fig. 6-28; see also Figs. 17-8 and 20-5).
5. Restrict the pulpal depth of the preparation to a maximum of 0.2 mm into dentin (except when (1) preparing a tooth for a gold foil restoration, in which case
the initial depth is 0.5 mm into dentin as described in
Chapter 21) or (2) when the occlusal enamel has been
worn thin. To be as conservative as possible, the prepara-

Rules for establishing outline form for pit-andfissure tooth preparation

tion for an occlusal surface pit-and-fissure lesion is first
prepared to a depth of 1.5 mm, as measured at the central
fissure. Depending on the cuspal steepness angles,

1. Extend the preparation margin until sound tooth
structure is obtained and no unsupported and/or
weakened enamel remains.
2. Avoid terminating the margin on extreme eminences
such as cusp heights or ridge crests.
3. If the extension from a primary groove includes onehalf or more of the cusp incline, consideration should
be given to capping the cusp. If the extension is twothirds, the cusp-capping procedure is most often the
proper procedure (Fig. 6-27), which removes the
margin from the area of masticatory stresses.

the facial and lingual prepared walls usually will be
greater than 1.5 mm. As such an example, note in Fig.
6-1, A, that the initial depth is two thirds of a 3-mm
long No. 245 bur blade, or 2 mm, as related to the
prepared facial and lingual walls, but is only half the
blade length, or 1.5 mm, as related to the preoperative central fissure location. However, once this
depth is established, if remaining enamel pit or fissure is present on less than 50% of the pulpal floor, it
is removed during the final stage of tooth preparation (see Step 5: Removal of Any Remaining Enamel

Rule for cusp capping: If extension from a primary groove toward the cusp tip is no
more than half the distance, then no cusp capping; if this extension is from one half to two thirds
of the distance, then consider cusp capping; if the extension is more than two thirds of the distance, then usually cap the cusp.
FIG . 6-27

A, Enameloplasty on area of imperfect coalescence of enamel. B, No more than onethird of the enamel thickness should be removed.
FIG. 6-28

C H A PT E R 6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

Pit or Fissure, Infected Dentin, and/or Old Restorative Material, if Indicated). However, if the amount of
pit or fissure remaining is greater than 50% of the
pulpal floor, the entire pulpal floor is deepened (at
this time of preparing outline form) to a maximum
initial depth of 0.2 mm into dentin. This will mean
0.2 mm into dentin when extension is to sound tooth
structure (i.e., a 0.2-mm dentinal wall, with the remainder of the wall formed in enamel). Thus, the actual depth of the preparation may vary from 1.5 mm,
depending on the thickness of the enamel and the
steepness of the cuspal inclines. During this cutting
procedure, the end of the bur may be in air (over a hole or
caries depression), in old restorative material, or in caries.
6. When two pit-and-fissure preparations have less
than 0.5 mm of sound tooth structure between them,
they should be joined to eliminate a weak enamel
wall between them.
7. Extend the outline form to provide sufficient access
for proper tooth preparation, restoration placement,
and finishing procedures (see Step 4: Convenience
Form).
In the application of these rules, adequate extension
of the outline form cannot be overemphasized; however, the improvement of restorative materials and increased knowledge about caries have permitted a more
conservative approach to preparation extension than
was originally expressed by Black. Therefore conservative, minimal tooth preparation extension should be
pursued while conforming to the sound principles of
outline form.
Naturally the typical outline form varies with the
anatomic form of the particular tooth being treated. In
extending fissures or connecting pits and fissures on the
occlusal surfaces of teeth, the margins usually do not
assume a straight line from one point to another (see
Fig. 6-32); rather, they follow smooth curves that preserve as much strong cusp structure as possible. Another example of this circumventing of cusps is the
conventional Class I preparation on maxillary premolars in which tooth extension includes an occlusal fissure, mesial and distal pits, and facial and lingual radiating fissures (see Fig 13-5 for a conventional Class I
composite preparation and Fig. 17-2 for a conventional
Class I amalgam preparation). The outline form resulting from proper extension of this preparation somewhat
resembles a butterfly in flight and is often referred to as
butterfly-type preparation. The most narrow portion of the
preparation, faciolingually, is between the cusp heights.
As much of the cusp incline as possible should be preserved in
any preparation involving the occlusal surface, provided
that other principles are maintained at the same time.
Outline form will vary from tooth to tooth and is dictated by these rules.

On the occlusal surfaces of molars, all developmental
grooves should be included to the extent of their being
fissured, with appropriate consideration first being
given to use of enameloplasty, a sealant, or a preventive
resin or conservative composite restoration (see Extension for Prevention: Enameloplasty, Sealant, Preventive
Resin, or Conservative Composite Restoration). At
times, this may necessitate extending onto the facial or
lingual surfaces (particularly the facial surface of the
mandibular molar and the lingual surface of the maxillary molar). The methods of including the facial or lingual fissures and pits are discussed under amalgam
( Chapter 17), composite (Chapter 13), and gold restorations (Chapter 20).
For faulty pits on the lingual surfaces of maxillary anterior teeth and occlusal two-thirds of the lingual and
facial surfaces of molars, the extent of caries or defect
and provision of minimal manipulative access are the
chief criteria for preparation extension.
Outline form and initial depth for smooth-surface lesions. Smooth-surface lesions occur in two very
different locations: (1) proximal surfaces or (2) the
gingival portion of the facial and lingual surfaces (see
Fig. 6-2, B and C). For discussion of outline features and
initial depth in initial tooth preparation, each location
must be considered separately.
Proximal Surfaces (Classes ll, lll, and IV). The proximal surface presents another controlling factor in establishing outline form, namely, the location of the contact area in
relation to the adjacent tooth.
Rules for establishing outline forms for proximal
surface tooth preparations
1. Extend the preparation margins until sound tooth
structure is obtained and no unsupported and/or
weakened enamel remains. (Sometimes, unsupported
but not friable enamel may remain in tooth preparations for bonded restorations.)
2. Avoid terminating the margin on extreme eminences
such as cusp heights or ridge crests.
3. Extend the margins to allow sufficient access for
proper manipulative procedures.
4. Restrict the axial wall pulpal depth of the proximal
preparation to a maximum of 0.2 to 0.8 mm into dentin
(the greater depth when the extension is onto the root
surface; the lesser depth when no retention grooves
will be placed). Typically, in this stage of tooth preparation for Class II amalgam restorations, which will
have proximal retention locks, the cutting instrument
( No. 245 bur) is positioned by being held parallel
to the DEJ and thereby creating a cut approximately
0.3 mm into enamel with the remainder of the instrument diameter (approximately 0.5 mm) into dentin
(see Fig. 6-1, C). During this initial cutting, portions of
the instrument may be in air (from a void caused by

C H A PT E R 6

deeper caries) but it should not remove dentin caries
that is deeper pulpally than 0.5 mm from the DEJ.
5. Usually, gingival margins of tooth preparations are
extended apically of the proximal contact to provide
a minimum clearance of 0.5 mm between the gingival margin and the adjacent tooth (see Fig. 17-44, F).
Otherwise, this gingival extension is to sound tooth
structure and no farther.
6. Likewise, the facial and lingual margins in proximal
tooth preparations usually are extended into the respective embrasures to provide specified clearance
between the prepared margins and the adjacent tooth.
The purpose of this clearance is to place the margins
away from close contact with the adjacent tooth so
that the margins can be better visualized, instrumented, and restored (see Figs. 17-60, A and B; 17-63,
A and B; 18-11; and 18-24). However, for a skilled operator it is permissible to leave the prepared facial or
lingual margin in contact with the adjacent tooth, especially with Class II and Class III composite restorations. Obviously, proper margin preparation, matrix
placement, and material insertion and finishing must
be done.
In the Class 11 preparation involving two surfaces, the
occlusal outline is governed by the factors that determine the placement of margins of pit-and-fissure lesions, and for inlays the preparation of a dovetail on the
occlusal surface in the area of the occlusal pit opposite
the involved proximal surface (see Chapter 20).
Note that when extending the proximal surface incisally in Class III preparations, the incisal margin may be
placed in the area of contact, especially when an esthetic
restorative material is used or when the incisal embrasure is not large enough to allow extension incisal of
contact and still have a strong incisal angle of the tooth.
An incisal margin of sound enamel in the contact area
should not be extended incisally to clear the contact, unless necessary for instrumentation in tooth preparation
or restoration, such as may be required in gold foil.

Gingival Portion of Facial and Lingual Surfaces
(Class V). The outline form of Class V tooth preparations is
governed ordinarily only by the extent of the lesion, except
pulpally. Therefore extension mesially, gingivally, distally,
and occlusally (incisally) is limited to reaching sound tooth
structure; and during this initial tooth preparation, the bur
depth is usually no deeper than 0.8 to 1.25 mm pulpally from
the original (when unaffected) tooth surface. The lesser axial
wall depth (0.8 mm) is at a gingival wall without an enamel
portion (i.e., the margin is on the root surface, see Fig 6-1, A).
The correct axial wall pulpal depth at the occlusal (incisal)
wall is that which provides a 0.5 mm extension into dentin
(the remainder being enamel). Infected caries deeper than
these described depths should not be removed by the cutting
instrument during this initial preparation stage.

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

Restricted and Increased Extensions. Conditions
that may warrant consideration of restricted or reduced extensions for smooth-surface tooth preparations are: (1) proximal contours and root proximity, (2) esthetic requirements,
and (3) the use of some tooth preparations for composite
restorations.
Some conditions that may necessitate increased extensions for smooth-surface tooth preparations are: (1) mental or physical handicaps, (2) advanced age of the patient,
(3) restoration of teeth as partial denture abutments or as
units of a splint, (4) need for additional measures for retention and resistance form, and (5) need to adjust tooth
contours.
Enameloplasty. Sometimes a pit or groove (fissured
or not) does not penetrate to any great depth into the
enamel and does not allow proper preparation of tooth
margins, except by undesirable extension. This is always true of the end of a fissure. If such a shallow feature is removed and the convolution of the enamel is
rounded or "saucered," the area becomes cleanable, finishable, and allows conservative placement of preparation margins. This procedure of reshaping the enamel
surface with suitable rotary cutting instruments is
termed enameloplasty (see Fig. 6-28). Specific applications of this procedure are covered and illustrated in detail in chapters pertaining to tooth preparations for inlay and amalgam restorations (see Figs. 17-8 and 20-5, A
and B). Enameloplasty does not extend the outline form. The
amalgam or gold restorative material is not placed into
the recontoured area, and thus the only difference in the
restoration is that the thickness of the restorative material at the enameloplastied margin (or pulpal depth of
the external wall) is decreased. This differs from including adjacent faulty enamel areas in composite restorations because those areas are covered with the bonded
composite material. Such inclusions may restore carious, decalcified, discolored, or poorly contoured areas.
The operator must be selective in the choice of areas
on which enameloplasty is performed. Usually a fissure
should be removed by normal preparation procedures if
it penetrates to more than one-third the thickness of the
enamel in the area. If one-third or less of the enamel
depth is involved, the fissure may be removed by enameloplasty without preparing or extending the tooth preparation. This procedure is applicable also to supplemental grooves (fissured or not) extending up cusp inclines.
If the ends of these grooves were included in the tooth
preparation, the cusp could be weakened to the extent
that it would need to be capped. Provided these areas
are "saucered" by enameloplasty, the cusp strength can
be retained and a smooth union effected between the
restorative material and the enamel margin, because the
grooved enamel is eliminated.
Another instance in which enameloplasty is indicated
is on a shallow fissure that approaches or crosses a lingual

CHAPTER 6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

or facial ridge (see Fig. 20-20). This fissure, if extended
under tooth extension principles, would involve two
surfaces of the tooth. Use of the enameloplasty procedure can often confine the tooth preparation to one surface and produce a smooth union of the tooth surface
and restorative material. An example would be the lingual fissure of a mandibular first molar that terminates
on the occlusolingual ridge. Conventional extension
should terminate when approximately 2 mm of tooth
structure remains between the bur and the lingual surface, and the remainder of the fissure then reshaped,
provided the terminal portion of the fissure is no more
than one-third of the enamel in depth. Otherwise, the
tooth preparation must be extended onto the lingual
surface (see Fig. 20-20).
As specific tooth preparations are detailed, several
additional applications of enameloplasty will be cited. It
also may be applied to teeth in which no preparation is
anticipated. However, extreme prudence must be used
in the selection of these areas and the depth of which the
enamel is removed. This procedure should not be used
unless the fissure can be made into a groove with a
saucer base by a minimal reduction of enamel and unless centric contacts can be maintained. For composite
preparations, it may be appropriate to seal shallow fissures with sealant or composite material, without any
mechanical alteration to the fissure.
Step 2: Primary Resistance Form. While extending
the external preparation walls to sound tooth structure,
the shape and form of the preparation walls must be initiated. Depending on the restorative material to be used,
and especially in Classes 1, II, and IV restorations, the
preparation wall design at this initial stage should provide for both protection against fracture from forces delivered in the tooth's long axis (primary resistance form)
and retention of the material in the tooth against forces
in reverse.
Definition. Primary resistance form may be defined as
that shape and placement of the preparation walls that best
enable both the restoration and the tooth to withstand, without fracture, masticatory forces delivered principally in the

long axis of the tooth. (For protection principally against
oblique forces, see Step 7-Secondary Resistance and
Retention Forms, and Final Tooth Preparation Stage.)
The relatively flat pulpal and gingival walls prepared
perpendicular to the tooth's long axis help resist forces
in the long axis of the tooth and prevent tooth fracture
from wedging effects (Fig. 6-29).
Principles. The fundamental principles involved in
obtaining primary resistance form are: (1) to use the box
shape with a relatively flat floor, which helps the tooth
resist occlusal loading by virtue of being at right angles
to those forces of mastication that are directed in the
long axis of the tooth; (2) to restrict the extension of the
external walls (keep as small as possible) to allow strong
cusp and ridge areas to remain with sufficient dentin
support; (3) to have a slight rounding (coving) of internal
line angles to reduce stress concentrations in tooth structure; (4) in extensive tooth preparations, to cap weak
cusps and envelope or include enough of a weakened tooth
within the restoration to prevent or resist fracture of the
tooth by forces both in the long axis and obliquely (laterally) directed (most resistance to oblique or lateral
forces is attained later in the final tooth preparation
stage); (5) to provide enough thickness of restorative material to prevent its fracture under load; and (6) to bond
the material to tooth structure when appropriate. Conventional and beveled conventional preparation designs provide these resistance form principles. Modified
tooth preparation designs are for small-to-moderate size
composite restorations and may not provide uniform
pulpal or axial depths or minimal thickness for the material. However, any bonded restoration results in increased resistance form, as discussed later.
During extension of external walls to sound tooth in
developing outline form in conventional Classes I and II
preparations, the end of the cutting instrument prepares
a relatively flat pulpal wall of uniform depth into the
tooth (1.5 to 2 mm overall depth or 0.2 mm into dentin)
(see Fig. 6-1, A and C). The pulpal wall, therefore, is as flat
as the original occlusal surface and the DEJ (these roughly
paralleling each other). This semblance of flatness (see

FIG 6-29 Resistance forms must consider resistance of tooth to fracture from forces exerted on
restoration. Flat floor (A) will help prevent restoration movement, whereas rounded pulpal floor
( B) may allow a nonbonded restoration rocking action producing a wedging force, which may
result in shearing of tooth structure.

CHAPTER 6

Fig. 6-29) is perpendicular to those masticatory forces
directed nearly in the long axis of the tooth, and thus is
ideal for the stable seating of a restoration that can best
resist such forces without fracture of the tooth (both
wedging forces on the tooth or tilting forces on the
restoration are unlikely). Following the same principle,
in the proximal portion of conventional Class 11 preparations, the end of the cutting instrument prepares a gingival wall (floor) that is flat and relatively perpendicular
to these forces. A modified preparation design for a
composite restoration may resemble a scooped appearance, rather than having uniform depths or wall configurations. Such preparation form may not enhance resistance form, but the restoration is bonded and therefore
adequate resistance to tooth or restoration fracture is
obtained.
Minimally extended facial and lingual walls conserve
dentin supporting the cusps as well as facial and lingual
ridges, thereby maintaining as much strength of the remaining tooth structure as possible. This resistance is
against obliquely delivered forces, as well as those in
the tooth's long axis.
Internal and external angles within the tooth preparation are slightly rounded (coved) so that stresses in the
tooth and restoration from masticatory forces will not be
as concentrated at these line angles . 28 Rounding internal
line angles (those with apices directed internally) reduces the stress on the tooth, thus resistance to fracture of
the tooth is increased. Rounding external angles (those
with apices directed externally [e.g., axiopulpal line angles]) reduces the stress on some restorative materials
(amalgam and porcelain), thus increasing resistance to
fracture of the restorative material. Details regarding
these tooth preparation modifications are described in
Chapters 14 and 17 to 20 (see Fig. 6-32).
A tooth weakened by extensive caries deserves consideration of the fourth principle (capping weakened
cusp(s) and/or extending to include cusp[s] entirely) in
obtaining primary resistance form during tooth preparation. In extensive caries, facial or lingual extension of
the pulpal or gingival walls indicates: (1) reduction
of weak cusps for capping by the restorative material
(see rules for cusp reduction in the following Features
section; see Figs. 6-27, 19-8, and 20-22), and/or (2) extension of gingival floors around axial tooth corners
onto facial or lingual surfaces (see Figs. 17-71 and 20-25,
J through P). Either of these features provides some resistance both to forces in the long axis and to those
obliquely (laterally) directed.
Restorative material thickness affects the ability of a
material to resist fracture. The minimal occlusal thickness for amalgam for appropriate resistance to fracture
is 1.5 mm, cast metal 1 to 2 mm (depending on the region), and porcelain 2 mm. Composite restorative materials may have more acute marginal angles, and although no specific thickness dimension has been noted

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

for strength, most composite restorations are 1 to 2 mm
thick.
Bonded restorations increase the strength of the weakened unprepared tooth structure .5 Therefore enhanced
resistance form results from bonding a material to the
prepared tooth.
When considering the resistance form in anterior
proximoincisal preparations (Class IV), one must recognize the narrowness faciolingually of the anterior teeth
(and therefore the lesser dentinal support) in applying
the principles of obtaining resistance form.
In pulpless teeth, special consideration is applied in
obtaining resistance form because of the weakened nature of the remaining structure. 12 The weakened cusps
may need to be reduced, enveloped, and covered with
restorative material to prevent the cracking or splitting
of the remaining tooth structure in accord with the
fourth principle mentioned previously. Methods of cusp
protection are discussed in Chapters 13, 17, 19, and 20.
Placement of a bonded restoration into pulpless teeth
may reduce the need for cusp reduction.
Factors. The need to develop resistance form in a
preparation is a result of several factors. Certain conditions must be assessed to reduce the potential for fracture of either the restoration or the tooth. Foremost is
the assessment of the occlusal contact on both the
restoration and the remaining tooth structure. Obviously, the greater the occlusal force and contacts, the
greater is the potential for future fracture (e.g., the further posterior the tooth, the greater is the effective masticatory force because the tooth is closer to the condyle
head).
The amount of remaining tooth structure also affects the
need and type of resistance form. Very large teeth, even
though extensively involved with caries or defects, may
require less resistance form consideration, especially in
regard to capping cusps, because the remaining tooth
structure is still bulky and strong enough to resist fracture. Weakened, friable tooth structure should always
be removed in the preparation, but sometimes unsupported, but not friable, enamel may be left. This is usually for esthetic reasons in anterior teeth, especially on
the facial surfaces of maxillary teeth where stresses are
minimal and a bonded restoration typically is used.
The type of restorative material also dictates resistance
form needs. Amalgam requires a minimum occlusal
thickness of 1.5 mm for adequate strength and longevity
in relation to wear. Cast metal requires less thickness to
resist fracture but should still have a dimension of at
least 1 mm in areas of occlusal contact, even though the
marginal dimensions of cast metal restorations are thinner. Ceramics require a minimum dimension of 2 mm to
resist bulk fracture. The dimensional needs of composite are more dependent on the occlusal wear potential of
the restored area. In posterior teeth, the thickness requirement is greater than for anterior teeth. Composite

CHAPTER 6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

can be used in thinner applications such as veneers or
minor esthetic enhancements as long as the wear potential is considered.
The last factor relates to the enhancement of resistance
form simply by bonding a restoration to the tooth.
Bonding amalgam, composite, or ceramic to prepared
tooth structure increases the strength of the remaining
unprepared tooth, thereby reducing the potential for
fracture.-' In fact, the benefits of bonding procedures may
permit the operator to leave a portion of the tooth in a
more weakened state than usual or not to cap a cusp.
Features. The design features of tooth preparation
that enhance primary resistance form are as follows and
are discussed in more detail in the technique chapters:
1. Relatively flat floors
2. Box shape
3. Inclusion of weakened tooth structure
4. Preservation of cusps and marginal ridges
5. Rounded internal line angles
6. Adequate thickness of restorative material
7. Reduction of cusps for capping when indicated
Reduction of cusps, when indicated, occurs as early
as possible in the preparation to improve access and
visibility. Obviously the decision to reduce a cusp (for
capping) is very important and should be approached
j udiciously. Although the cusp size and occlusal considerations may affect the decision, a basic rule guides
the reduction of cusps during initial tooth preparation.
This rule is: (1) cusp reduction should be considered
when the outline form has extended half the distance
from a primary groove to a cusp tip, and (2) cusp reduction usually is mandatory when the outline form has
extended two-thirds the distance from a primary groove to
a cusp tip (see Fig. 6-27). The exception to capping a
cusp where extension has been two-thirds from a primary groove toward the cusp tip is when the cusp is
unusually large and the operator judges that adequate
cuspal strength remains, or when a bonded restoration
is being used and the operator judges the bonding to
provide for adequate remaining cuspal strength.
Although specific preparation form is necessarily associated with a bonded composite restoration, preparation walls left in a roughened state increase the surface
area for bonding and therefore enhance both resistance
and retention forms. More roughened preparation
walls, enamel, and dentin may be prepared with coarse
diamond instruments.
Step 3: Primary Retention Form. During initial
tooth preparation, not only does the form and shape of
the preparation need to provide resistance against fracture, but also the design of the preparation must provide for the retention of the restorative material in the
tooth for nonbonded restorations (Fig. 6-30). Often, features that enhance the retention form of a preparation

FIG 6-30 Basic primary retention form in Class II tooth preparations for amalgam (A) with vertical external walls of proximal and occlusal portions converging occlusally and for inlay
( B) with similar walls slightly diverging occlusally.

also enhance the resistance form (e.g., pins placed in a
manner so that one portion of a tooth supports another
portion of the tooth).
Definition. Primary retention form is that shape or form of
the conventional preparation that resists displacement or removal of the restoration from tipping or lifting forces. In many
respects, retention form and resistance form are accomplished in the same cutting procedure and are sometimes discussed together. Although they are separate entities, the same prepared form may contribute to both the
resistance and retention qualities of the preparation.
The retention form developed during initial tooth
preparation may be adequate to retain the restorative
material in the tooth. Sometimes, however, additional
retention features must be incorporated in the final
stage of tooth preparation.
Principles. Because retention needs are related to the
restorative material used, the principles of primary retention form vary depending on the material.
For amalgam restorations in most Class I and all Class
II conventional preparations, the material is retained in
the tooth by developing external tooth walls that converge occlusally (see Fig. 6-30, A). In this way, once the
amalgam is placed in the preparation and hardens, it
cannot dislodge without some type of fracture occurring. In these preparations, the facial and lingual walls
of the occlusal portion of the preparation, as well as the
proximal portion, converge toward the occlusal surface.
This convergence should not be overdone for fear of
leaving unsupported enamel rods on the cavosurface
margin of the occlusal surface. The occlusal convergence of the proximal portion has several advantages in
addition to producing retention. It allows slight facial
and/or lingual extension of the proximal portion of the
preparation in the gingival area while conserving the
marginal ridge, thus reducing the forces of mastication
on critical areas of the restoration. The cavosurface angle where the proximal facial and lingual walls meet the
marginal ridge is a desirable 90 degrees because of the
occlusal convergence of the preparation.
In other conventional preparations for amalgam (such
as Classes III and V), the external walls diverge out-

CHAPTER 6

wardly to provide strong enamel margins, and therefore
retention coves or grooves are prepared in the dentinal
walls to provide the retention form (see Step 7:
Secondary Resistance and Retention Forms).
Adhesive systems provide some retention by micromechanically bonding amalgam to tooth structure and also
reducing or eliminating microleakage. 2 However, until longevity studies demonstrate that bonding systems provide complete retention form, traditional retention features should be provided for amalgam restorations,
especially for root-surface restorations.
Composite restorations primarily are retained in the
tooth by a micromechanical bond that develops between
the material and etched and primed prepared tooth structure. In such restorations, the enamel and dentin are
etched by an acid and the dentin is primed with a dentin
bonding agent. These procedures are discussed in a subsequent section, Final Tooth Preparation Stage, and in
Chapters 11 to 15. Sometimes the tooth preparation for
a composite restoration also requires the use of mechanical retention form, which is considered part of the final
stage of preparation and is presented in Chapters 11 to
15. As an example, in a Class V composite tooth preparation on the root surface, groove retention may be recommended in addition to the use of a bonding system.
Because of the strong and rapid bond that is developed
between etched enamel and composite, the initial tooth
preparation of many composite restorations should result in a beveled or flared (greater than 90 degrees)
enamel marginal configuration that is ready to be
etched. These would be considered the modified composite tooth preparations. Other conventional-type
composite restorations may require a separate enamel
beveling procedure that would be done in final tooth
preparation. When bevels are placed on a conventional
preparation, the design is then a beveled conventional
preparation.
Cast metal (usually a gold alloy) intracoronal restorations rely primarily on almost parallel vertical (longitudinal) walls to provide retention of the casting in the
tooth. During initial tooth preparation, the preparation
walls must be designed not only to provide for draw or
draft (in order for the casting to be placed into the tooth)
but also to provide for an appropriate small angle of divergence (2 to 5 degrees per wall) from the line of draw
that will enhance retention form. The degree of divergence needed primarily depends on the length of the
prepared walls: the greater the vertical height of the
walls, the more divergence is permitted and recommended, but within the range described.
In inlay and onlay preparations for cast metal restorations, the opposing vertical walls diverge outwardly by
only a few degrees to each other and to a draw path that
is usually perpendicular to the floor of the preparation
(see Fig. 6-30, B). Having sufficient length of these almost parallel walls allows enough frictional resistance

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

and mechanical locking of the luting agent into minute
irregularities of both the casting and the preparation
walls to counteract the pull of sticky foods. Close parallelism of prepared vertical walls is a principal retention
form for cast metal restorations, another being the use of
a luting agent that bonds to tooth structure.
In Class II preparations involving only one of the two
proximal surfaces, an occlusal dovetail may aid in preventing the tipping of the restoration by occlusal forces.
When an unusually large amount of retention form is
required, the occlusal dovetail may be placed whether
or not caries is on the occlusal surface. The dovetail simulates a Class I occlusal preparation in the area opposite
the proximal involvement (see Fig. 20-6).
Another consideration in obtaining retention form, in
addition to compensating for the forces of mastication,
is the pull of sticky foods. In all cases, the preparation
design must provide for the retention of the restorative
material in the tooth. Although features of primary retention form are very important, sometimes additional,
secondary retentive features are necessary in the final
stage of tooth preparation, usually for nonbonded
restorations.
Factors. The factors that affect primary retention form
already have been presented.
Features. Likewise, the features of primary retention
form already were presented.
Step 4: Convenience Form. Convenience form is that
shape or form of the preparation that provides for adequate observation, accessibility, and ease of operation in preparing and
restoring the tooth. On occasion, obtaining this form may
necessitate extension of distal, mesial, facial, or lingual
walls to gain adequate access to the deeper portion of
the preparation. An example of this is the preparation
and restoration of a mesial (or distal) root surface carious lesion (see Fig. 17-62). However, the arbitrary extension of facial margins on anterior teeth usually is
contraindicated for esthetic reasons.
In preparations for gold foil, convenience form assumes an additional purpose other than accessibility for
instrumentation (see Chapter 21). It includes establishing convenience points for the starting of foil condensation. These are prepared by deepening, or making more
acute, one or more point angles of the preparation. Usually proper refinement of the line and point angles of
Class I and Class V preparations is sufficient to produce
the necessary convenience form, but additional accentuation may be practiced if desired. The most common application of convenience points is in the gingival area of
proximal preparations and is for the convenience of the
operator in starting the condensation of the foil. These
angles or points are placed with small instruments and
should not be "sunk" into the gingival floor.
The occlusal divergence of vertical (longitudinal)
walls of tooth preparations for Class II cast restorations
also may be considered as convenience form. Extending

CHAPTER 6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

proximal preparations beyond proximal contacts is another convenience form procedure. Although exceptions
may be made to such an extension, preparing the proximal walls to obtain clearance with an adjacent proximal
surface affords better access to finish the preparation
walls and the restorative material. For cast restorations,
clearance with the adjacent proximal surface is mandatory to finish the preparation walls, make an accurate impression of the prepared tooth, and try in the casting.
FINAL TOOTH PREPARATION STAGE
Once the extensions and wall designs have fulfilled the
objectives of initial tooth preparation, the preparation
should be inspected carefully for other needs. With conservative amalgam or composite restorations, the preparation may be complete after initial tooth preparation
except for: (1) sealing the prepared walls for amalgam
or (2) etching and priming the prepared walls for the
bonding agent(s) for amalgam or composite. Often, however, additional steps (steps 5 through 9) are needed in
the final tooth preparation stage. These steps are discussed in the following sections.
Step 5: Removal of Any Remaining Enamel Pit or
Fissure, Infected Dentin, and/or Old Restorative Material, if Indicated. In teeth in which the carious lesion
is minimal, the carious enamel and dentin are probably
removed in completing the initial tooth preparation. If,
however, carious infected dentin remains after completion of the previous steps, it should be removed now.
Definition. Removal of any remaining enamel pit or fis-

sure, infected dentin, and/or old restorative material is the
elimination of any infected carious tooth structure or faulty
restorative material left in the tooth after initial tooth preparation. The exception to the removal of infected carious
tooth structure is when it is decided to perform an indirect pulp cap as described in Caries Control Restoration
in Chapter 3. Removal of remaining enamel pit or fissure typically occurs as small, minimally extended excavations on isolated faulty areas of the pulpal floor. Removal of defective old restorative material is addressed
later in this section. However, in dentin, as caries progresses, an area of decalcification precedes the penetration of microorganisms. This area of decalcification often appears discolored in comparison with undisturbed
dentin, yet it does not exhibit the soft texture of caries.
This dentin condition may be termed affected dentin
and differs from infected dentin in that it has not been
significantly invaded by microorganisms. It is accepted
and appropriate practice to allow affected dentin to remain in a prepared tooth.
The use of color alone to determine how much dentin
to remove is unreliable. One risks the commitment to
overcut on the one hand and to leave infected dentin on
the other hand. Often soft, acute (rapid) caries manifests
itself entirely within the normal range of color for dentin; thus the eye may not differentiate among infected,

affected, or unaffected, normal dentin. On the other
hand, distinctly discolored dentin, certainly affected, is
often sound and comparable in hardness to surrounding unaffected, normal dentin.
A clinical description of exactly where infected dentin
stops and affected dentin begins is practically impossible. It is an empirical decision enhanced by practical
knowledge and experience, although some chemical,
"caries-disclosing" dyes may aid that decision. Fortunately the decision does not require exactness, for it is
not necessary that all dentin invaded by microorganisms be removed. In shallow or moderately deep lesions, the removal of the masses of microorganisms and
the subsequent sealing of the preparation by a restoration at best destroy those comparatively few remaining
microorganisms and at worst reduce them to inactivity
Even in deep caries in which actual inor dormancy.
vasion of the pulp may have occurred, the recovery of
the pulp requires only that, between virulence of the organisms and resistance of the host, a favorable balance
be established for the pulp. This is often accomplished
by removing all soft caries with its numerous organisms. 39 Leaving carious dentin at the DEJ area is not acceptable (see Fig. 6-4, A; see also Residual Caries).
After initial tooth preparation, the initial depths may
result in old restorative material remaining on the pulpal or axial walls. Any remaining old restorative material

should be removed if any of the following conditions are
present: (1) the old material may affect negatively the
esthetic result of the new restoration (i.e., old amalgam
material left under a new composite restoration), (2) the
old material may compromise the amount of anticipated needed retention (i.e., old glass-ionomer material
having a weaker bond to the tooth than the new composite restoration using enamel and dentin bonding),
(3) radiographic evidence indicates caries is under the
old material, (4) the tooth pulp was symptomatic preoperatively, or (5) the periphery of the remaining old
restorative material is not intact (i.e., there is some
breach in the junction of the material with the adjacent
tooth structure that may indicate caries under the old
material). If none of these conditions is present, the operator

may elect to leave the remaining old restorative material to
serve as a base, rather than risk unnecessary excavation
nearer to the pulp, which may result in pulpal irritation or
exposure.
Techniques. When a pulpal or axial wall has been established at the proper initial tooth preparation position
and a small amount of infected carious material remains, only this material should be removed, leaving a
rounded, concave area in the wall. The level or position
of the wall peripheral to the caries removal depression
should not be altered.

In large preparations with extensive soft caries, the removal of infected dentin may be accomplished early in the
initial tooth preparation. When the extensive caries is re-

CHAPTER 6

moved, the condition of both the pulp and the remaining tooth structure has a definite bearing on the type of
restoration placed. For this reason, it is more expedient
to remove extensive caries early in the tooth preparation before time and effort are spent in doing a tooth
preparation for a certain restorative material that is
then deemed inadequate for satisfactory restoration of
the tooth.
Another instance in which the removal of caries is indicated
early in tooth preparation is when a patient has numerous
teeth with extensive caries. In one appointment, infected
dentin is removed from several teeth and temporary
restorations are placed. After all the teeth containing extensive caries are so treated, then individual teeth are restored definitively. This procedure stops the progress of
caries and is often referred to as the caries control technique (see Chapter 3). It should be obvious that this
practice allows many more teeth to remain serviceable
than if a single, seriously involved tooth were treated to
completion at the expense of others in the same condition in the same mouth.
Large areas of soft caries usually are best removed
with spoon excavators by flaking up the caries around
the periphery of the infected mass and peeling it off in
layers. The bulk of this material is thus easily removed
in a few large pieces.
Regarding the removal of the harder, heavily discolored dentin, opinions vary between the use of spoon excavators, round steel burs at very low speed, and round
carbide burs rotating at high speeds. There are several
considerations in the removal of this type of caries in
deep-seated lesions, although basically the primary concern is for the pulp. Pulpal damage may result from the
creation of frictional heat with the use of a bur. The pulp
may become infected by forcing microorganisms into
the dentinal tubules through excessive pressure with a
spoon excavator, or it may be exposed when either instrument is used. The ideal method of removing this
material would be one in which minimal pressure is exerted, frictional heat is minimized, and complete control
of the instrument is available. Consideration of these factors usually favors the use of a round carbide bur, in a highspeed handpiece, with air coolant and slow speed (just above
stall-out). This technique gives the operator complete
control of the instrument, minimizes pressure and heat
generation, and permits adequate vision of the area being operated on. Examination of the area with an explorer
following the removal of infected dentin is advisable, but
should be done judiciously to avoid perforation into the pulp.
Caries that rapidly develops sometimes is relatively unstained, and unless the sense of touch is relied on to detect softness, the operator may unintentionally leave infected dentin. Ideally, removal of infected dentin should
continue until the remaining dentin feels as hard as normal dentin. However, heavy pressure should not be applied with an explorer, or any other instrument, on what

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

is believed to be a thin layer of reasonably firm dentin
next to a healthy pulp, for fear of creating an unnecessary pulpal exposure.
Removal of remaining old restorative material, when indicated, also is accomplished with use of a round carbide
bur, at slow speed (just above stall-out) with air or airwater coolant. The water spray (along with high-volume
evacuation) is used when removing old amalgam material to reduce the amount of mercury vapor.
Step 6: Pulp Protection, if Indicated. Although the
placement of liners and bases is not a step in tooth
preparation in the strict sense of the word, it is a step in
adapting the preparation for receiving the final restorative material. Therefore a basic discussion of this subject
follows.
The reason for using traditional liners or bases is to either
protect the pulp or to aid pulpal recovery or both. However,
often, neither liners nor bases are needed. When the
thickness of the remaining dentin is minimal, heat generated by injudicious cutting can result in a pulpal burn lesion,
an abscess formation, or pulpal necrosis. Thus a water or
air-water spray coolant must be used with the highspeed rotary instrument. Cutting the dentinal odontoblastic fibrils that previously have not been exposed to any
irritating episode such as caries or tooth wear will result
in degeneration and death of the affected primary odontoblasts and their extensions. The involved tubules become open, dead tracts. Worse still, if the remaining
dentin thickness is 1.5 mm or more and the cutting was
done atraumatically using high speed with water or airwater spray, the pulp is not irritated enough to form replacement odontoblasts and therefore no reparative
dentin is formed to seal the pulpal side of the dead
tracts.
Other pulpal irritants that affect operative procedures
are: (1) some ingredients of various materials; (2) thermal changes conducted through restorative materials;
(3) forces transmitted through materials to the dentin;
(4) galvanic shock; and, most importantly, (5) the ingress
of noxious products and bacteria through microleakage.
Because the ingress of bacteria is most commonly associated with various pulpal responses, more emphasis
should be given to the complete sealing of the prepared
dentinal tubules. Effective tubular sealing will prevent
penetration of bacteria or their toxins. Although one
study3l found calcium hydroxide to be more successful
on vital pulp exposures on subhuman primates than
bonding agents, other studies are reporting success using
23
resin bonding agents on exposed pulps.
Although
dentin bonding agents are being recognized as beneficial
for dentinal sealing under any type of restorative material, another technique also is being advocated. This
technique results in the removal of the most coronal, potentially infected area of the pulpal tissue; placement of a
calcium hydroxide liner over the excavated pulpal area;
and then, placement of a resin-modified glass-ionomer

CHAPTER 6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

liner over the calcium hydroxide. This technique is advocated when root canal therapy is not utilized on direct
pulpal exposures. Currently, no scientific evidence supports this procedure. However, the pulpal tissue appears
to be disinfected and necrosed by the calcium hydroxide
and the area adequately sealed by the resin-modified
glass ionomer, both of which may increase the success of
a pulp-capping procedure.
As these technologies and techniques are developed
further, more information will become available. If such
technologies are scientifically substantiated, the presented use of liners, bases, and varnishes will be significantly altered if not eliminated. In spite of that likelihood, the following information is presented about
traditional use of liners, bases, and varnishes/ sealers.
Certain physical, chemical, and biologic factors
should be considered in the selection of a traditional
liner or base. The material used should be one that, under the circumstances, more nearly satisfies the needs of
the individual tooth. The attainment of generic status by
popularization is insufficient basis for selecting a particular material. Rather, selection should be based on an
assessment of the anatomic, physiologic, and biologic
response characteristics of the pulp, as well as the physical and chemical properties of the considered material.
In the following discussion of traditional liners and
bases, the use of the term liners is reserved for those volatile
or aqueous suspensions or dispersions of zinc oxide or calcium hydroxide that can be applied to a tooth surface in a relatively thin films' and are used to affect a particular pulpal response. Liners also may provide: (1) a barrier that
protects the dentin from noxious agents from either the
restorative material or oral fluids, (2) initial electrical insulation, and/or (3) some thermal protection. Bases are
considered those cements commonly used in thicker dimensions beneath permanent restorations to provide for mechanical, chemical, and thermal protection of the pulp. Examples
of bases include zinc phosphate; zinc oxide-eugenol;
calcium hydroxide; polycarboxylate; and the most common, some type of glass ionomer.
A traditional liner is used to medicate the pulp when
suspected trauma has occurred. The desired pulpal effects include both sedation and stimulation, the latter
resulting in reparative dentin formation. The specific
pulpal response desired dictates the choice of liner. If
the removal of infected dentin does not extend deeper
than 1 to 2 mm from the initially prepared pulpal or axial wall, usually no liner is indicated. If the excavation extends into or very close to the pulpal tissue, a calcium hydroxide liner is usually selected to stimulate reparative
dentin. In the past, if the excavation depth was between the
above examples, a zinc oxide-eugenol liner may have been selected (except for composite restorations, for which it could
i mpede the polymerization process) to provide a palliative,
sedative pulpal response, thus decreasing the potential for
postoperative sensitivity. Now zinc oxide-eugenol liners

rarely are used and, instead, a glass-ionomer material
would be used, but primarily as a base.
Both zinc oxide-eugenol and calcium hydroxide liners (chemosetting types that harden) in thicknesses of
0.5 mm or greater have adequate strength to resist condensation forces of amalgam 9 and provide protection
against short-term thermal changes. However, when a
very deep excavation occurs, it may be necessary to
overlay the typical calcium hydroxide liner with a
stronger base material. As a general rule, it is desirable
to have approximately a 2-mm dimension of bulk between the pulp and a metallic restorative material. This
bulk may include remaining dentin, liner, and/or base.
The base materials offer greater pulpal protection from
mechanical, thermal, and chemical irritants. However,
for composite restorative materials, which are thermal insulators and passively inserted, a liner of calcium hydroxide is indicated only when pulpal exposure or the excavation
is judged to be within 0.5 mm of the pulp and bases are not
indicated.
The ability of calcium hydroxide to stimulate the formation
of reparative dentin when it is in contact with pulpal tissue
makes it the typical material of choice for application to very
deep excavations and known pulpal exposures. As stated
earlier, the use of resin bonding agents is also proposed
for similar clinical situations. Very deep excavations
may contain microscopic pulpal exposures that are not visible to the naked eye. Hemorrhage is the usual evidence
of a vital pulp exposure, but with microscopic exposures, such evidence may be lacking. Nevertheless, these
exposures are large enough to allow direct pulpal access
for bacteria and fluids. Liners and bases in exposure areas
should be applied without pressure. It is recommended to
have approximately a 1-mm thickness of calcium hydroxide (chemoset) over near or actual exposures, which then
may be overlaid with a base for amalgam or cast metal
restorations.
When zinc phosphate, glass-ionomer, or polycarboxylate cement bases are used, tooth depth and the properties of prior liners determine the technique of placement.
When there is known or suspected exposure to the pulp,
care must be exercised against forcing material into the
pulp chamber. Therefore it is essential to either first use
a calcium hydroxide cement in adequate thickness or a
nonpressure technique for placing an overlay base.
In instances when either an adequate thickness of calcium hydroxide liner has been placed over an exposure
or the excavation is not deep enough to provide danger
of forcing cement into the pulp chamber by pressure, a
zinc-phosphate base material may be packed (condensed) into place. In these instances, the cement base is
used in a puttylike consistency and may be conveyed to
the preparation with a hand instrument. The cement
base may then be shaped with appropriate hand instruments. A base of zinc phosphate placed in this manner
has advantages of less free acid and often the elimina-

CHAPTER 6

tion of the use of rotary instruments in forming the surface of the base.
Usually, however, a glass ionomer is used for most
"base" needs. These materials effectively bond to tooth
structure, contain fluoride, and have sufficient strength
as a base. Furthermore, they are easily placed and contoured, when necessary. Because of their chemical and
micromechanical bond to tooth structure, retentive
preparation features are not required. These materials
are excellent for bases under amalgam, gold, or ceramic
restorations.
In tooth preparations for castings, deeply excavated
areas must be covered with positively retained liner/
base material that will withstand the subsequent procedural forces. Zinc phosphate, glass-ionomer, and polycarboxylate cements fulfill the requirements for such
overlay base material. Bases for cast restorations need to be
positively retained against possible displacement in subsequent
procedures. Often undercuts resulting from removal of
infected dentin provide retention for the cement base.
However, for some tooth preparations, prepared undercuts must be provided to retain a nonbonding cement
base. If this is the case, a small round bur is used to place
small indentations in the excavation in dentin in areas
away from the pulp. Usually two such undercuts opposing each other are sufficient to hold the cement base.
The prepared undercuts need not be deeper than the diameter of the bur (see Figs. 20-10 and 20-11).
The protective qualities of zinc phosphate, polycarboxylate, and glass-ionomer cements are somewhat in
proportion to the bulk of material used. Thus, a thin
layer will not afford the protection of a thicker layer.
However, the level to which a base is built should never compromise the desired tooth preparation depth, resulting in inadequate restorative material thickness.
No liner or base exhibits the crushing strength of amalgam. Therefore, in the placement of large amounts of
these materials, ideally there should be at least three seats,
tripodally distributed, for the amalgam on sound dentin at the
prescribed level of the pulpal wall in initial tooth preparation
(see Fig. 17-12, C. This will allow the restoration and the
tooth structure, rather than the liner or base, to bear the
load after the amalgam has set. However, when a bonded
material is used, tripodal seats are less necessary.
Tooth varnish is a solution liner that was used in the
past to seal dentinal tubules and was placed on all tooth
preparation walls for amalgam and on dentinal walls of
tooth preparations for cast gold, but was not used for
composites. Tooth varnish usually was applied just before the insertion of an amalgam or cementation of a
cast gold restoration. Two coats of tooth varnish were
applied to the prepared surfaces for amalgams. Tooth
varnish was the only material necessary for shallow excavations in such preparations. The varnish prevented
penetration of materials into the dentin18 and helped
prevent microleakage. 44 Varnishes also helped reduce

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

postoperative sensitivity by reducing the infiltration of
fluids and salivary components at the margins of newly
placed restorations."
Two coats of tooth varnish were applied to dentin surfaces (not on enamel walls) of tooth preparations for
cast gold restorations. The varnish barrier helped reduce pulpal irritation from the luting cement.
Although varnishes were valuable in reducing postoperative sensitivity, their thin film thickness was insufficient to provide thermal insulation even when applied
in two coats . 43 However, their presence significantly
reduced the diffusion of acid from cements into dentin.
Consequently, their use was recommended routinely,
especially in deep preparations, with any restorative or
cementing material containing acid." Tooth varnishes
were not used under composites because the solvent in the
varnish could react with or soften the resin component
in the composite, adversely affecting polymerization.
Furthermore, the free monomer of the resin could dissolve the varnish film, rendering it ineffective. 17 Obviously, varnish was not to be applied to any prepared
tooth walls that would be, or were, treated (etched and
primed) for bonding. This textbook no longer recommends the use of tooth varnishes. Instead, sealers are
recommended under nonbonded restorations and
bonding systems are used for bonded restorations. The
objective of both of these approaches is to seal the prepared dentin tubules. The nonbonded amalgam restoration should be sealed with Gluma Desensitizer 33 before
amalgam placement. Similar materials may be used before cementing restorations with nonbonding luting
agents. All bonded restorations (composites, amalgams,
glass-ionomer-type materials and bonded indirect
restorations) use various bonding systems that not only
bond the material to the tooth but also seal the prepared
tooth structure.
Darkening of tooth structure adjacent to an amalgam
restoration is observed on occasion. This may be caused
by the gradual diffusion of metallic ions into the dentin
or by light passing through the translucent enamel that
is reflected from the underlying amalgam . Placement
of a cement liner or base when replacing such a restoration decreases this unnatural appearance. This use of
liner or base is for esthetic purposes rather than strictly
for pulp protection. Completely sealing the prepared
dentin before amalgam insertion prevents this diffusion.
Again, it should be mentioned that the historical use
of traditional liners, bases, and varnishes has become
obsolete as more focus is directed on the use of various
agents to provide sealing of dentinal tubules. As evidence increases regarding the benefits of such materials,
the use of traditional liners, bases, and varnishes may be
li mited only to clinical situations in which pulpal exposure has occurred; and yet, even that indication may
eventually be eliminated in favor of the use of resin adhesives. Regardless of the materials used, protecting the

CHAPTER

6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

pulp appropriately is mandatory for the successful
restoration of teeth.
Step 7: Secondary Resistance and Retention
Forms. After removal of any remaining enamel pit or

fissure, infected dentin, and/or old restorative material
(if indicated) and pulpal protection has been provided
by appropriate liners and bases, additional resistance
and retention features may be deemed necessary for the
preparation. Many compound and complex preparations require these additional features. When a tooth
preparation includes both occlusal and proximal surfaces, each of those areas should have independent retention and resistance features.
Because many preparation features that improve retention form also improve resistance form, and the reverse is true, they are presented together. The secondary
retention and resistance forms are of two types: (1) mechanical preparation features and (2) treatments of the preparation
walls with etching, priming, and adhesive materials. How-

ever, the second type is not really considered as a part of
tooth preparation, but rather as the first step for the insertion of the restorative material. Regardless, some
general comments are presented about such treatments.
Mechanical Features. A variety of mechanical alterations to the preparation enhance retention form, and
these alterations require additional removal of tooth
structure. They are discussed fully in the respective
technique chapters but are briefly identified in the next
five sections.
Retention locks, grooves, and coves. Vertically oriented retention locks and retention grooves are used to
provide additional retention for proximal portions of
some tooth preparations; the locks are for amalgams (see
Fig. 17-54) and the grooves are for cast metal restorations
(see Fig. 20-8). Horizontally oriented retention grooves
are prepared in most Classes III and V preparations for
amalgam (see Figs. 18-13 and 18-31) and in some rootsurface tooth preparations for composite (see Fig. 12-41).
Retention coves are appropriately placed undercuts
for the incisal retention of Class III amalgams (see Fig.
18-14), occlusal portion of some amalgam restorations
(see Fig. 17-38, C and D), some Class V amalgams (see
Fig. 18-32), and occasionally for facilitating the start of
insertion of certain gold foil restorations.
Retention locks in Class II preparations for amalgam
restorations are generally thought to increase retention
of the proximal portion against movement proximally
due to creep. Also, they are believed to increase the resistance form of the restoration against fracture at the
j unction of the proximal and occlusal portions. In vivo
studies do not substantiate the necessity of these locks
in proximoocclusal preparations with occlusal dovetail
outline forms or in MOD preparations. However,
they are recommended for extensive tooth preparations
for amalgam involving, for example, wide faciolingual
proximal boxes and/or cusp capping.

Groove extensions. Additional retention of the restorative material may be obtained by arbitrarily extending the preparation for molars onto the facial or
lingual surface to include a facial or lingual groove.
Such an extension when performed for cast metal restorations, results in additional vertical (longitudinal),
almost-parallel walls for retention. This feature also enhances resistance for the remaining tooth due to envelopment (see Figs. 20-27, I, and 20-30, I).
Skirts. Skirts are preparation features used in cast
gold restorations that extend the preparation around
some, if not all, of the line angles of the tooth (see Figs.
20-29 and 20-30). When properly prepared, skirts provide additional, opposed vertical walls for added retention. The placement of skirts also significantly increases
resistance form by enveloping the tooth, thereby resisting fracture of the remaining tooth from occlusal forces.
Beveled enamel margins. Both cast gold/metal and
composite restorations include beveled marginal configurations. The bevels for cast metal may slightly improve
retention form when there are opposing bevels, but are
used primarily to afford a better junctional relationship
between the metal and the tooth. Many enamel margins
of composite restorations have a beveled or flared configuration to increase both the surface area of etchable
enamel and to maximize the effectiveness of the bond
by etching more enamel rod ends.
Pins, slots, steps, and amalgampins. When the
need for increased retention form is unusually great, especially for amalgam restorations, several other features
may be incorporated into the preparation. The use of
pins and slots increases both retention and resistance
forms (see Figs. 19-1 and 19-42). Amalgampins and
properly positioned steps also improve retention form,
but not to the extent of pins or slots. All of these procedures are described in Chapter 19.

Placement of Etchant, Primer, or Adhesive on Prepared Walls. In addition to mechanical alterations to

the tooth preparation, certain alterations to the preparation walls by actions of various materials also afford
increased retention, as well as resistance to fracture.
Both enamel and dentin surfaces may be treated with
etchants and/or primers for certain restorative procedures. Although such treatment is considered the first
step in the insertion of the restorative material, some
general comments are presented here.
Enamel wall etching. Enamel walls are etched for
bonded restorations that use porcelain, composite, or
amalgam materials. This procedure consists of etching
the enamel by an appropriate acid, resulting in a microscopically roughened surface to which the bonding material is mechanically bound.
Dentin treatment. Dentinal surfaces may require
etching and priming when using bonded porcelain,
composite, or amalgam restorations. The actual treatment varies with the restorative material used, but for

C H A PT E R

most composite restorations, a dentin bonding agent is
recommended. Sometimes a glass-ionomer material is
used as a base before the restoration of the tooth with
another restorative material, usually amalgam. The advantages and disadvantages of this technique are presented in Chapters 11 through 19.
Lastly, it should be noted that retention of indirect
restorations (fabricated extraorally) is enhanced by the
luting agent used. Although not considered part of the
tooth preparation, the cementation procedure does affect
the retention of these restorations, and some cementing
materials do require pretreatment of the dentin, resulting in varying degrees of micromechanical bonding.
Step 8: Procedures for Finishing the External Walls
of the Tooth Preparation. Finishing the external walls

of the preparation entails consideration of both degree
of smoothness and cavosurface design, since each restorative material has its maximum effectiveness when
the appropriate conditions are developed for that specific material. Not all preparations require special finishing of the external walls at this stage, because the
walls may already have been finished during earlier
steps in the preparation. This is particularly true for
many composite preparations and most amalgam
preparations.
Because most preparations have external walls in
enamel, most of the following discussion relates to the
appropriate finishing of enamel walls. Nevertheless,
when a preparation has extended onto the root surface
(no enamel present), the root-surface cavosurface angle
should be either 90 degrees (for amalgam, composite, or
porcelain restorations) or beveled (for intracoronal cast
metal restorations). The 90-degree root-surface margin
provides a butt joint relationship between the restorative material and the cementum/dentin preparation
wall, a configuration that provides appropriate strength
to both. The beveled root-surface margin for cast metal
restorations provides the benefits addressed in later
paragraphs of this section.

6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

Theoretically, the enamel rods radiate from the DEJ to
the external surface of the enamel and are perpendicular
to the tooth surface. All rods extend full length from the
dentin to the enamel surface. The rods converge from the
DEJ toward concave enamel surfaces and diverge outwardly toward convex surfaces. In general, therefore, the
rods converge toward the center of developmental
grooves and diverge toward the height of cusps and
ridges (see Fig. 6-2, B and C). In the gingival third of
enamel of the smooth surfaces in the permanent dentition, the rods incline slightly apically (see Fig. 6-33).
In some instances, the rods of occlusal enamel appear
to be harder than those of axial (mesial, facial, distal, lingual) enamel. This can be attributed to the amount of interlacing or twisting of the rods in the former as compared with the straight rods of the latter. Enamel with
such interlacing of the rods is termed gnarled enamel (see
Fig. 2-7).
Having a thorough knowledge of the direction of the
enamel rods on various tooth surfaces, the operator
should create all enamel walls so that all rods forming
the prepared enamel wall have their inner ends resting
on sound dentin. Enamel rods that do not run uninterrupted from the preparation margin to dentin tend to
split off, leaving a V-shaped ditch along the cavosurface
margin area of the restoration (see Fig. 17-48). This
should not be interpreted that all enamel walls should
consist of full-length rods. The strongest enamel margin is
one that is composed of full-length enamel rods supported on
the preparation side by shorter enamel rods, all of which extend to sound dentin (Fig. 6-31). The shorter enamel rods

buttress the full-length enamel rods that form the margin, thus increasing the strength of the enamel margin
(see Fig. 17-6, B).
An acute, abrupt change in an enamel wall outline
form results in fracture potential, even though the
enamel may have dentin support. This indicates that the
preparation outline and walls should have smooth
curves or straight lines. When two enamel walls join,

Definition. Finishing the preparation walls is the further
development, when indicated, of a specific cavosurface design
and degree of smoothness or roughness that produces the
maximum effectiveness of the restorative material being used.
Objectives. The objectives of finishing the prepared

walls are to: (1) create the best marginal seal possible between the restorative material and the tooth structure,
(2) afford a smooth marginal junction, and (3) provide
maximum strength of both the tooth and the restorative
material at and near the margin. The following factors
must be considered in the finishing of enamel walls and
margins: (1) the direction of the enamel rods, (2) the
support of the enamel rods both at the DEJ and laterally
(preparation side), (3) the type of restorative material
to be placed in the preparation, (4) the location of the
margin, and (5) the degree of smoothness or roughness
desired.

FIG.6-31

All enamel walls must consist of either full-length
enamel rods on sound dentin (a) or full-length enamel rods on
sound dentin supported on preparation side by shortened rods
also on sound dentin (b).

CHAPTER 6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

the resulting line angle may be "sharp." If so, it should
be slightly curved ("softened"). This slight rounding
usually results in a similar curve at the margin. It is to
be understood that this discussion is not about cavosurface (marginal) bevels. In other words, line angles formed
by the junction of enamel walls should be slightly rounded
whether they are obtuse or acute (Fig. 6-32).
Features. As already stated, finishing of external
walls has two primary features: (1) the design of the
cavosurface angle, and (2) the degree of smoothness or
roughness of the wall.
The design of the cavosurface angle is dependent on the
restorative material being used. Because of the low edge
strength or friability of amalgam, a tooth preparation
cavosurface angle of 90 degrees produces maximal
strength for both the amalgam and the tooth. Thus, no
bevels are placed at the cavosurface margin. On occlusal
surfaces for Class I and Class II amalgam restorations,
the incline planes of the cusp and the converging walls
(for retentive purposes) of the preparation approximate
the desirable 90-degree butt joint junction, even though
the actual occlusal enamel margin may be greater than
90 degrees. However, as shown in Fig. 17-26, when extending the facial and lingual walls to remove extensive
occlusal caries, tilting the bur is often indicated to conservatively extend the margins and provide a 90- to 100-degree
cavosurface angle. The extent of this alteration in bur orientation is dictated by the inclination of the contiguous unprepared enamel surfaces.
Beveling the external walls is a preparation technique
used for some materials such as intracoronal cast
gold/metal and composite restorations. Occasionally,
some margins in preparations for gold foil are beveled,
but these bevels form a cavosurface angle much less obtuse than for gold/metal castings and composites.
Beveling can serve four useful purposes in the tooth
preparation for a casting: (1) it produces a stronger
enamel margin, (2) it permits a marginal seal in slightly
undersized castings, (3) it provides marginal metal that
is more easily burnished and adapted, and (4) it assists
in adaptation of gingival margins of castings that fail to
seat by a very slight amount. The bevel of the margin in

a preparation for castings should produce a cavosurface
angle that results in 30- to 40-degree marginal metal (see
Figs. 20-12 to 20-14). The marginal gold alloy will be too
thin and weak if the angle of the gold bevel is less than
30 degrees. If the angle is greater than 40 degrees, the
marginal gold will be too thick and therefore too difficult to burnish satisfactorily. The steepness of cuspal inclines is a factor when beveling occlusal margins, even
eliminating the need for a bevel when inclines are very
steep. (See Fig. 20-14 for developing 140-degree occlusal
cavosurface margins.) The gingival margin of a casting is
a very critical one; an improper beveling of this area
may lead to early failure of the restoration. Providing
30-degree beveled metal in this area results in a sliding,
lap fit that definitely improves adaptation of metal to
tooth at this margin (see Fig. 20-12).
Ceramic materials belong to that category of materials that contraindicated beveling the cavosurface margins. When amalgam is used, beveling also is contraindicated, except on the gingival floor of a Class II
preparation when enamel is still present. In these instances, it is usually necessary to place a slight bevel (approximately 15 to 20 degrees) only on the enamel portion of
the wall to remove unsupported enamel rods. This is necessary because of the gingival orientation of enamel rods
in the cervical area of the tooth crown. This minimal
bevel may be placed with an appropriate gingival margin trimmer hand instrument and, once placed, still results in a 90-degree amalgam marginal angle (Fig. 6-33).
Sometimes the unsupported enamel rods are removed
simply by an explorer tip pulled along the margin. If the
angle of marginal amalgam is less than 80 to 90 degrees
(90 degrees is best), it is likely to fracture because it has
low edge strength. Such a fracture leaves a crevice at the
interface. Thus, the external walls of amalgam preparations must be designed to result in an approximately
90-degree amalgam marginal angle.
Beveling enamel margins in composite preparations
is primarily indicated for larger restorations that have
increased retention needs. The use of a beveled marginal form with a composite tooth preparation may be
advocated because the potential for retention is in-

FIG 6-32 The junctions of enamel walls land respective margins) should be slightly rounded,
whether obtuse or acute.

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

CHAPTER 6

creased by increasing the surface area of enamel available for etch and having a more effective area of etch obtained by etching the cut ends of the enamel rods. Other
advantages of beveling composites are: (1) adjacent, minor defects can be included with a bevel, (2) esthetic
quality may be enhanced by a bevel creating an area of
gradual increase in composite thickness from the margin to the bulk of the restoration, and (3) the marginal
seal may be enhanced.
The degree of desired smoothness or roughness is the second consideration in finishing external walls. Although
both the selection of finishing instruments and the
methods of finishing enamel walls are reserved for sections describing specific types of preparations, the reasoning for finishing procedures is reviewed in this section. The advent of high-speed cutting procedures has
produced two pertinent factors related to finishing
enamel walls: (1) the lessening of tactile sense and (2)
the rapid removal of tooth structure. Performing enamel
finishing with high speed can be, and is, accomplished
by the highly skilled and experienced operator; however, in the hands of inexperienced operators, high
speed can lead to overextension of margins, grooved
walls, and/or rounded cavosurface angles, especially
on proximal margins. If this method is used, plain-cut
fissure burs produce the finest surface .21 These burs produce
a smoother surface than crosscut burs, diamonds, or
carborundum stones.' In fact, at stall-out speeds with an
air-turbine handpiece, an excellent finish is achieved
with this type of bur.
In instances when proximal margins are left at minimal extension for esthetic reasons, rotating instruments
(burs, stones, wheels, or discs) may not be usable because of lack of proper access. In such locations, hand instruments may need to be used. The planing action of a
razor-sharp hand instrument can result in a smooth
enamel wall, although it may not be as smooth as that
achieved with other instruments. Hand instruments
such as enamel hatchets and margin trimmers may be
used in planing enamel walls, cleaving enamel, and es-

Occlusal view

tablishing enamel bevels. Their usefulness in this capacity should not be overlooked.
The restorative material used is the primary factor dictating the desired smoothness or roughness of an enamel wall.

The prepared walls of inlay or onlay preparations require a very smooth surface to permit undistorted impressions and close adaptation of the casting to the
enamel margins. In areas of sufficient access, fine sandpaper discs can create a very smooth surface; however,
proper use of hand instruments, plain fissure burs, or
fine diamond stones also create satisfactory enamel
margins for cast preparations. On the other hand, prepared walls and margins of composite restorations can
be roughened, usually by a course diamond stone, to
provide increased surface area for bonding.
Likewise, when using gold foil or amalgam restorative
materials, a very smooth preparation wall is not as desirable
as for cast restorations. When these materials are used, it

has been demonstrated 29 that a more rough surface prepared wall markedly improves resistance to marginal
leakage. This does not mean, however, that finishing of
the enamel wall should be ignored, but it does indicate
that no strict rule for the selection of the finishing instrument can be applied in all instances.
Step 9: Final Procedures: Cleaning, Inspecting, and
Sealing. Final procedures in tooth preparation include

the cleaning of the preparation, inspecting the preparation, and applying a sealer when indicated. Treatment of
the preparation wall, when appropriate, with etchant,
primer, or adhesive is reviewed but is considered the first
step in material insertion. The first procedure includes removing all chips and loose debris that have accumulated,
drying the preparation (do not desiccate), and making a
final complete inspection of the preparation for any remaining infected dentin, unsound enamel margins, or
any condition that renders the preparation unacceptable
to receive the restorative material. Naturally, most of the
gross debris has been removed during the preparation
steps, but some fine debris usually remains on the prepared walls after all cutting is completed.

Vertical section

Unsupported Beveled gingival
enamel rods
floor enamel

FIG . 6-33 Vertical section of Class II cavity preparation. Gingival floor enamel (and margin) is unsupported on dentin and friable unless removed.

C H A PT E R

6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

The usual procedure in cleaning is to free the preparation of visible debris with warm water from the syringe and then to remove the visible moisture with a
few light surges of air from the air syringe. (Regarding
moisture on the dentinal surface, be mindful that dentin
bonding systems have specific requirements for etching,
priming, and applying the bonding agent, which usually is hydrophilic). In some instances, debris will cling
to the walls and angles despite the above efforts, and it
may be necessary to loosen this material with an explorer or small cotton pellet. After all the visible debris
has been removed, the preparation is dried free of visible moisture. It is important not to dehydrate the tooth by
overuse of air or by the application of alcohol. Once the
preparation has been cleaned adequately, it is visually
inspected to confirm its appropriateness.
Composite restorations, which are bonded to the tooth, require some treatment of the preparation before insertion of

the restorative material. This treatment usually includes
etching the enamel and dentin and placing a dentin
bonding agent. Some of these steps were presented earlier in this chapter (see Step 7-Secondary Resistance
and Retention Forms) and are discussed in detail in
Chapters 11 to 15. In all cases, the smear layer is either altered or removed and a hybrid layer is formed, which is
characterized by an intermingling of the resin adhesive
(bonding agent) with collagen fibrils of the intertubular
dentin. This creates a strong mechanical bond between
the composite and the dentin. Additional strong mechanical bonding occurs between the composite and the
etched enamel, when enamel is present.
In accomplishing the final procedures before insertion
of the restorative material, sterilization of the preparation may be considered. Although the term sterilization
is used in the discussion of this topic, "disinfection"
would be a more accurate term to describe the objective.
However, because much of the literature uses the term
"sterilization," it is used here as well. The act of sterilizing a preparation before inserting a restoration may be
a logical procedure. Some operators do place medicaments in preparations for sterilization purposes, based
on empirical factors. Others who have studied this procedure find the literature controversial on the subject of
preparation sterilization.
The dentin tubule lumen, varying from 1 to 4 um in
diameter at varying distances between the DEJ and the
pulp, certainly presents sufficient size for the entrance
of microorganisms. Investigators have verified the presence of microorganisms in dentin tubules beneath
preparation walls. However, this fact in no way indicates that caries is progressing or that failures will automatically result. As early as 1943, Besic 3 contended that
caries in dentin stops or gradually ceases as soon as the
carious lesion is closed to the oral environment, even if
microorganisms remain in dentin. Investigators have

noted that the number of bacteria in the dentin tubules
is relatively small compared with the numerous microorganisms found in the superficial carious lesion.
The question is whether these remaining organisms are
capable of extending caries under the environmental
circumstances of a restored tooth .39
Of course, the possible infection of the pulp is always
a consideration when bacteria remain in a channel that
terminates in the pulp chamber. In this respect, the resistance of vital tissue to the ingress of bacteria must be
considered. In many instances, the presence of reparative dentin deposited as a result of pulpal insult constitutes a significant deterrent to bacterial progress. Another possible answer as to why all teeth with carious
involvement do not eventually have pulpal infection is
that bacteria may be in a dormant condition as the result
of the more sealed environment of a restored tooth.
The basic considerations in preparation sterilization
follow: (1) Is the agent used effective? (2) Is it capable of
maintaining a sterile field? (3) Is it harmful to the pulp?
Early investigators indicated that the common antiseptics once used routinely for preparation sterilization
were effective only as a surface disinfectant when applied for a limited amount of time. Therefore, simply
swabbing the preparation with such agents as silver nitrate, phenol, or ethyl alcohol only leads to a false sense
of security. If some of these agents were allowed to remain for a longer period of time, to permit penetration
of the tubules, irreparable pulpal damage would result." In deep preparations microscopic pulp exposures
are not always visible to the naked eye, and the placement of harmful sterilization agents in such preparations would likely produce pulpal damage.
Assuming that a surface disinfectant is successful, it is
doubtful that the sterilization can exist for any appreciable length of time because of the difference between
the thermal coefficients of expansion of the tooth and
filling materials.'"' Although differing in amounts,
marginal leakage has been demonstrated for most restorative materials .31-44,45 However, a large percentage of
unsterilized restorations exhibits no caries on the internal wall as a result of this oral fluid penetration; therefore it is possible that the natural defense mechanism of
the tooth or the germicidal action of the restorative material destroys any invading bacteria. The germicidal or
protective effect ranges from the fluoride content of
some materials to the deposition of corrosive products
at the interface of the preparation wall in an amalgam.
Zinc oxide-eugenol cement has significant germicidal
properties over an extended period of time. Therefore
some protection from further carious action is afforded
by some restorative materials .3s
The objective of the previous discussion is not to determine whether preparation sterilization via medicaments is essential or nonessential in the practice of sound

CHAPTER

dentistry but to ascertain if it is justified in routine procedures. The routine use of specific sterilization medicaments
should no longer be a strong consideration. However, as
stated previously, the use of dentin bonding agents (for
bonded restorations) and sealers (for nonbonded restorations) to effect a dentin tubular seal is recognized.
Eliminating bacterial penetration is so important that the use
of dentin bonding agents or sealers will likely become universal (under all restorations).

ADDITIONAL CONCEPTS
I N TOOTH PREPARATION
A thorough understanding of the principles and concepts of tooth preparation must be obtained by an effective operative dentist. Applying those to a specific restorative procedure, combined with appropriate
operating skills and proper handling of the restorative
materials will result in successful treatment. Because
many new techniques are being advocated for the
restoration of teeth, the operator must assess each such
proposed method of treatment on the basis of the fundamentals of tooth preparation presented in this chapter.
Understanding these fundamental principles makes the
assessment of new approaches easier and wiser.
Because amalgam and composite restorations are
done more often than other operative procedures, most
of the proposed new ways to restore teeth relate to these
types of restorations.
AMALGAM RESTORATIONS
Several new restorative techniques have been advocated
for use with amalgam restorations. In assessing these
and future proposals, the operator must remember the fundamental requirements for a successful amalgam preparation.

These prerequisites for success are: (1) 90-degree junctions of amalgam with tooth structure, (2) mechanical
retention form, and (3) adequate thickness for the amalgam material.
Amalgam Box-Only Tooth Restorations. Box-only
tooth preparations for amalgam may be advocated for
some posterior teeth in which a proximal surface requires restoration, but the occlusal surface is not faulty
(see Fig. 17-61). A proximal box is prepared and specific
retention form is provided, but no occlusal step is included. Such restorations obviously are more conservative, in that less tooth structure is removed. That conservation of tooth structure must be weighed against
possible loss of retention form provided by the occlusal
step of a typical Class II amalgam preparation.
Amalgam Tunnel Tooth Restorations. In an effort to
be conservative of tooth structure removal, others advocate a tunnel tooth preparation. This preparation joins
an occlusal lesion with a proximal lesion by means of a
prepared tunnel under the involved marginal ridge. In
this way, the marginal ridge remains essentially intact.

6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

In assessing this technique, the adequacy of preparation
access may be controversial. Developing appropriately
formed preparation walls and excavating caries may be
compromised by lack of access and visibility. Whether
or not the marginal ridge is preserved in a strong state
also is controversial. This technique is controversial and
not supported in this textbook.
Adhesive Amalgam Restorations. Other techniques
advocated for amalgam restorations use adhesive systems. Some of these materials bond the amalgam material to tooth structure. Others seal the prepared tooth
structure with an adhesive resin before amalgam placement. Although the proposed bonding techniques vary,
the essential procedure is to prepare the tooth similar to
typical amalgam preparations except that more weakened, remaining tooth structure may be retained. Next,
the preparation walls are treated or covered with specific adhesive lining materials that mechanically bond to
both the tooth and the amalgam. The amalgam is condensed onto or into this resin-lining material before
polymerization and a bond develops between the amalgam and resin liner. The technique for the adhesive
resin liner is different in that the adhesive resin is placed
and polymerized before the amalgam placement.
COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS
Likewise, there are new concepts relating to the use of
composite to restore teeth. Some of the newer concepts
relating to preparations for composite restorations are
presented in Chapters 11 to 15. In these chapters modified, more conservative, preparations are presented as
well as preparations relating to expanded uses of composite such as for composite inlays, esthetic enhancements, the conservative composite restoration of posterior occlusal surfaces, the preventive resin restoration,
veneers, and porcelain inlays cemented with composite
materials. In addition to those concepts, several others
should be addressed.
Again, it is imperative that the operator understands the
requirements of successful composite restorations when assessing any proposed modifications. For a composite
restoration to be successful, (1) most marginal enamel
should have a beveled or flared form and all should be
etched; (2) dentin bonding systems should be used; and
(3) nonenamel (root surface) external walls should provide butt joint shapes, when necessary, and have appropriately placed mechanical retention form.
Composite Box-Only Tooth Restorations. The boxonly preparations for composite restorations are similar
to those for amalgam restorations, except the box form
is less distinct, having "roughed out" marginal configurations rather than refined, 90-degree butt joints. The
prepared tooth structure (both enamel and dentin) is
etched and/or primed; which provides the retention
form of the material in the tooth.

C H A PT E R 6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

Composite Tunnel Tooth Restorations. The tunnel
preparation, as described above, also has been advocated for composite restorations. Usually it also is advocated to use a glass-ionomer liner under the composite,
and some suggest this preparation design be partially or
completely restored with a glass-ionomer restorative
material. The same disadvantages exist as with amalgam tunnel restorations and therefore this technique is
not recommended in this textbook.
"Sandwich" Technique. Another proposed treatment is the use of a glass-ionomer or flowable composite material as a liner under some composite restorations. The
advantages of this technique for glass-ionomer materials are purported to be: (1) the glass-ionomer material
bonds both to the tooth structure and the composite,
thereby increasing retention form; (2) fluoride contained
in the glass-ionomer material reduces the potential for
recurrent caries; and (3) the glass-ionomer material, because of its bond to tooth structure, provides a better
seal when used at non-enamel margins. These suggested advantages are controversial. For the flowable
composite as a liner under a composite, the purported
advantages are: (1) it acts as a shock absorber, distributing stresses applied to the more rigid composite, and (2)
it may reduce some of the negative effects of polymerization shrinkage.
Some considerations an operator must make about the
"sandwich" technique are: (1) Is the retention increased
or decreased? (2) Is the resistance form of the restoration
compromised because the composite does not rest on
tooth structure? (3) Does the preparation need to be

deeper into the tooth to provide enough space for both
materials? (4) Is the esthetic result sometimes compromised? (5) Do clinical research results support these
claims?
BONDED RESTORATIONS STRENGTHEN
WEAKENED TOOTH STRUCTURE
Another issue is that the placement of a bonded composite or bonded amalgam restoration will bind remaining portions of weakened tooth structure together.
The bond created between etched enamel and composite is very strong and not only is adequate to hold the
composite in the tooth, but also strengthens the remaining unprepared tooth structure. The use of a large composite restoration or a bonded amalgam may be a valid
alternative to more complex and expensive cast restorations for badly broken-down posterior teeth. A consideration in using this concept must still be the occlusal relationship of the involved tooth. If some centric contact
remains on a nonrestored portion of the occlusal surface, a large composite restoration may withstand any
minor possible loss of surface integrity caused by wear.
If, however, all the occlusal contact is on the restorative
material, the wear rate of the composite may be greater
even though the wear resistance of many composites is
similar to amalgams. Wear of the bonded amalgam is
not a problem.
Some of these new concepts in restoring teeth will become accepted methods of treatment. Because the adhesive amalgam and large bonded composite restorations
are successful and can improve the strength of the tooth,

CHAPTER 6

the need for their use is substantial. Because of the aging population, the need for the restoration of teeth having large existing, but failing restorations will be increased, and these treatment modalities may provide a
technique that is relatively fast, inexpensive, stress free,
and reliable.

SUMMARY
This chapter has addressed the principles of tooth
preparation. Specific tooth preparation techniques are
presented in various chapters later in the textbook.
What should be apparent at this time is that a tooth
preparation is determined by many factors, and each
ti me a tooth is to be restored, each of these factors must
be assessed. Tooth preparation for composite restorations is simpler and more conservative than for amalgam restorations because of the physical requirements
necessary for amalgam (Table 6-1). If the principles of
tooth preparation are followed, the success of any
restoration is greatly increased. No two tooth preparations are the same.
To summarize, numerous factors should be considered before initiating a tooth preparation. Box 6-1 lists
many of these factors, but it is not all inclusive.
The increasing bond strengths of enamel and dentin
bonding are likely to result in significant emphasis on
adhesive restorations. Likewise, the improved ability to bond
to tooth structure will likely continue to alter the entire tooth
preparation procedure. When materials can be effectively
bonded to a tooth while restoring the inherent strength
of the tooth, the need for refined tooth preparations is
reduced or eliminated. The only factors necessary then
for successful tooth restoration will be the ability and
knowledge to: (1) completely remove infected dentin
and friable enamel; (2) appropriately treat the enamel
and dentin with etchant, primer, and adhesive; (3) properly manipulate the to-be-bonded restorative material;

Factors to Consider Before Tooth
Preparation

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

and (4) contour the restoration to provide proper form
and function. Thus emphasis will shift away from traditional tooth preparation to knowledge of restorative materials
and dental anatomy.
REFERENCES
1. Akimoto N et al: Biocompatibflity of Clearfil Liner Bond 2 and
Clearfil AP-X systems on nonexposed and exposed primate
teeth. Quintessence Int 29(3): 177-188, 1998.
2. Ben-Amar A: Reduction of microleakage around new amalgam restorations, J Am Dent Assoc 119:725, Dec 1989.
3. Besic FC: The fate of bacteria sealed in dental cavities, J Dent
Res 22:349,1943.
4. Black GV: Operative dentistry, ed 8, 2 vols, Woodstock, 111,
1947-1948, Medico-Dental.
5. Boyer DB, Roth L. Fracture resistance of teeth with bonded
amalgams. Am J Dent 7(2):91-94, 1994.
6. Bronner FJ: Mechanical, physiological, and pathological aspects of operative procedures, Dent Cosmos 73:577, 1931.
7. Cantwell KR, Aplin AW, Mahler DB: Cavity finish with highspeed handpieces, Dent Progr 1:42, Oct 1960.
8. Charbeneau GT, Peyton FA: Some effects of cavity instrumentation on the adaptation of gold castings and amalgam,
J Prosthet Dent 8:514, 1958.
9. Chong WF, Swartz ML, Phillips RW: Displacement of cement
bases by amalgam condensation, JAm DentAssoc 74(1):97,1967.
10. Cox CF, Suzuki S: Re-evaluating pulp protection: calcium hydroxide liners vs cohesive hybridization, J Am Dent Assoc 125:
823-831,1994.
11. Englander HR, James VE, Mass] er M: Histologic effects of silver nitrate on human dentin and pulp, J Am Dent Assoc
57:621, 1958.
12. Frank AL: Protective coronal coverage of the pulpless tooth,
J Am Dent Assoc 59:895, 1959.
13. Fusayama T: A simple pain free adhesive restorative system by
minimal reduction and total etching, St Louis, 1993, Ishiyaku
EuroAmerica.
14. Fusayama T: Two layers of carious dentin: diagnosis and treatment, Oper Dent 4:63-70, 1979.
15. Fusayama T, Okuse K, Hosoda H: Relationship between
hardness, discoloration, and microbial invasion in carious
dentin, J Dent Res 45(4):1033-1046, 1966.
16. Gilmore HW et al: Operative dentistry, ed 4, St Louis, 1982,
Mosby.
17. Going RE: Status report on cement bases, cavity liners, varnishes, primers, and cleaners, J Am Dent Assoc 85:654, 1972.
18. Going RE, Massler M: Influence of cavity liners under amalgam restorations on penetration by radioactive isotopes, J
Prosthet Dent 11:298, 1961.
19. Going RE, Massler M, Dute HL: Marginal penetration of dental restorations by different radioactive isotopes, J Dent Res
39:273, 1960.
20. Guard WF, Haack DC, Ireland RL: Photoelastic stress analysis of buccolingual sections of Class II cavity restorations,
J Am Dent Assoc 57:631, 1958.
21. Hartley JL, Hudson DC: Clinical evaluation of devices and techniques for the removal of tooth structure, Randolph Air Force
Base, Texas, 1959, Air University.
22. Hyatt TP: Prophylactic odontotomy: the ideal procedure in
dentistry for children, Dent Cosmos 78:353, 1936.
23. Kanca J III: Replacement of a fractured incisor fragment over
pulpal exposure: a long-term case report. Quintessence Int
27(12):829-832,1996.

CHAPTER 6

Fundamentals in Tooth Preparation

24. Lee WC, Eakle WS: Possible role of tensile stress in the etiology of cervical erosive lesions of teeth, J Prosthet Dent 52(3):
374-380, 1984.
25. Markley MR: Restorations of silver amalgam, JAm DentAssoc
43:133, Aug 1951.
26. Marzouk MA et al: Operative dentistry, ed 1, St Louis, 1985,
Ishiyaku EuroAmerica.
27. Marzouk MA et al: Operative dentistry, ed 1, St Louis, 1985,
Ishiyaku EuroAmerica.
28. Massler M, Barber TK: Action of amalgam on dentin, J Am
Dent Assoc 47:415, 1953.
29. Menegale CM, Swartz ML, Phillips RW: Adaptation of restorative materials as influenced by the roughness of cavity
walls, J Dent Res 39:825, 1960.
30. Muntz JA, Dorfman A, Stephan RM: In vitro studies on sterilization of carious dentin: evaluation of germicides, J Am
Dent Assoc 30:1893, 1943.
31. Nelson RJ, Wolcott RB, Paffenbarger GC: Fluid exchange at
the margins of dental restorations, J Am Dent Assoc 44:288,
1962.
32. Reeves R Stanley HR: The relationship of bacterial penetration and pulpal pathosis in carious teeth, Oral Surg 22:59, July
1966.
33. Schupbach P, Lutz F, Finger WJ. Closing of dentinal tubules
by Gluma Desensitizer. Eur j Oral Sci, 105:414-421, Oct 1997.
34. Shafer WG, Hines MK, Levy BM: Textbook of oral pathology, ed
4, Philadelphia: 1983, WB Saunders.
35. Shay DE, Allen TJ, Muntz RE: Antibacterial effects of some
dental restorative materials, J Dent Res 35:25, Feb 1956.

36. Simonsen RJ: Preventive resin restoration, Quintessence Int
9(1):69-76, 1978.
37. Sockwell CL: Dental handpieces and rotary cutting instruments, Dent Clin North Am 15:219, Jan 1971.
38. Stanley HR: Criteria for standardizing and increasing credibility of direct pulp capping studies. Amer J Dent 11 (special
issue): S17-5334, 1998.
39. Stanley HR: Human pulp response to operative dental procedures, Gainesville, Fla, 1976, Storter Printing.
40. Street EV: Effects of various instruments on enamel walls,
J Am Dent Assoc 46:274,1953.
41. Sturdevant CM et al: The art and science of operative dentistry,
ed 1, NewYork, 1968, McGraw-Hill.
42. Sturdevant JR et al: Clinical study of conservative designs for
Class lI amalgams (abstract 1549), J Dent Res 67:306, 1988.
43. Sturdevant RE: A further study of inlay problems, J Am Dent
Assoc and Dent Cosmos 25:611, 1938.
44. Swartz ML, Phillips RW: In vitro studies on the marginal
leakage of restorative materials, J Am Dent Assoc 62:141, Feb
1961.
45. Swartz ML et al: Role of cavity varnishes and bases in the
penetration of cement constituents through tooth structure,
J Prosthet Dent 16:963, 1966.
46. Swift EJ, Trope M: Treatment options for the exposed vital
pulp, Pract Periodont Aesthet Dent 11(6):735-739, 1999.
47. Terkla LG, Mahler DB, Eysden IV: Analysis of amalgam cavity design, J Prosthet Dent 29:204, Feb 1973.
48. Voth ED, Phillips RW, Swartz ML: Thermal diffusion through
amalgam and various liners, J Dent Res 45:1184, 1966.

I.

II.

Hand instruments for cutting, 309
A. Materials, 309
1. Hardening and tempering heat
treatments, 309
2. Effects of sterilization, 309
B. Terminology and classification, 310
1. Instrument categories, 310
2. Instrument design, 310
3. Instrument shank angles, 310
4. Instrument names, 310
5. Operative cutting instrument formulas, 311
6. Cutting instrument bevels, 311
C. Cutting instrument applications, 314
1. Excavators, 314
2. Chisels, 314
3. Other cutting instruments, 315
D. Hand instrument techniques, 315
1. Modified pen grasp, 315
2. Inverted pen grasp, 315
3. Palm-and-thumb grasp, 315
4. Modified palm-and-thumb grasp, 316
5. Rests, 316
6. Guards, 316
E. Sharpening hand instruments, 316
1. Stationary sharpening stones, 317
2. Mechanical sharpeners, 317
3. Handpiece sharpening stones, 318
4. Principles of sharpening, 318
5. Mechanical techniques, 318
6. Stationary stone techniques, 318
7. Sharpness test, 321
F. Sterilization and storage of hand cutting
i nstruments, 322
Powered cutting equipment, 322
A. Development of rotary equipment, 322
B. Rotary speed ranges, 324

III.

I V.

V.

C. Laser equipment, 325
D. Other equipment, 327
Rotary cutting instruments, 329
A. Common design characteristics, 329
1. Shank design, 329
2. Neck design, 330
3. Head design, 330
B. Dental burs, 330
1. Historical development of dental burs, 330
2. Bur classification systems, 330
3. Shapes, 331
4. Sizes, 331
5. Modifications in bur design, 332
6. Additional features in head design, 334
7. Bur blade design, 336
C. Diamond abrasive instruments, 336
1. Terminology, 337
2. Classification, 337
3. Head shapes and sizes, 338
4. Diamond particle factors, 338
D. Other abrasive instruments, 338
1. Classification, 339
2. Materials, 339
Cutting mechanisms, 340
A. Evaluation of cutting, 340
B. Bladed cutting, 340
C. Abrasive cutting, 341
D. Cutting recommendations, 341
Hazards with cutting instruments, 342
A. Pulpal precautions, 342
B. Soft tissue precautions, 342
C. Eye precautions, 343
D. Ear precautions, 343
E. Inhalation precautions, 343

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

HAND INSTRUMENTS
FOR CUTTING

The removal and shaping of tooth structure are essential
aspects of restorative dentistry. Initially this was a difficult process accomplished entirely by the use of hand
instruments. The introduction of rotary, powered cutting equipment was one of the truly major advances in
dentistry. From the time of the first hand-powered dental drill to the present-day air-powered handpiece, tremendous strides have been made in the mechanical reduction of tooth structure, and thus in the ease with
which teeth can be restored. Modern high-speed equipment has eliminated the need for many hand instruments for tooth preparation. Nevertheless, hand instruments remain an essential part of the armamentarium
for quality restorative dentistry.
The early hand-operated instruments, with their large,
heavy handles (Fig. 7-1) and inferior (by present standards) metal alloys in the blades, were cumbersome,
awkward to use, and ineffective in many situations.
Likewise, there was no uniformity of manufacture or
nomenclature. Many dentists made their own hand instruments in an effort to find a suitable instrument for a
specific need. As the commercial manufacture of hand
instruments increased and dentists began to express
ideas on tooth preparation, it became apparent that some
scheme for identifying these instruments was necessary.
G.V. Black 6 among his many contributions to modern
dentistry, is credited with the first acceptable nomenclaturefor and classification of hand instruments. His classification system enabled both dentists and manufacturers
to communicate more clearly and effectively in regard to
instrument design and function.
Modern hand instruments, when properly used, produce beneficial results for both the operator and the patient. It should be noted that some of these results can be
satisfactorily achieved only with hand instruments, and
not with rotary instruments. Preparation form dictates
some circumstances in which hand instruments are to
be used, whereas accessibility dictates others.

Hardening andTempering HeatTreatments. To gain
maximal benefits from carbon steel or stainless steel, the
manufacturer must submit them to two heat treatments:
hardening and tempering. The hardening heat treatment hardens the alloy, but it also makes it brittle, especially when the carbon content is high. The tempering
heat treatment relieves strains and increases toughness.
These properties are optimized by the manufacturer.
Subsequent heating of hand instruments during dental
use can alter the original properties of the alloy and render it unserviceable. Flaming or improper sterilizing procedures can easily ruin a well-manufactured instrument.
Effects of Sterilization. Methods of sterilization are
sporicidal cold disinfection, boiling water, steam under
pressure (autoclave), chemical vapor, and hot air (dry
heat). (See Chapter 8 for details regarding acceptable
methods of sterilization.) Sterilizing carbon steel instruments by any of the first three methods causes discoloration, rust, and corrosion. However, several methods for
protecting against or minimizing these problems are
available. One method used by the manufacturer is to
electroplate the instrument. This affords protection, except on the blade, where use and sharpening remove
the plating. The plating also may pit or peel on the handle and shank under certain circumstances. A second
method of protection is by use of rust inhibitors, which
are soluble alkaline compounds. These are usually incorporated into commercial sporicidal cold disinfectant
solutions, and special preparations are available for use
in boiling water and autoclaves. The third method of
minimizing the effect of moisture is to remove the instruments promptly at the end of the recommended

MATERIALS

Hand cutting instruments are manufactured from two
main materials: carbon steel and stainless steel. In addition, some instruments are made with carbide inserts to
provide more durable cutting edges. Carbon steel is
harder than stainless steel, but when unprotected, it will
corrode. Stainless steel remains bright under most conditions but loses a keen edge during use much more
quickly than does carbon steel. Carbide, although hard
and wear resistant, is brittle and cannot be used in all
designs.
Other alloys of nickel, cobalt, or chromium are used
in the manufacture of hand instruments, but they usually are restricted to instruments other than those used
for the cutting of tooth structures.

FIG.7-1 Designs of some early hand instruments. These instruments were individually handmade, variable in design,
and cumbersome to use. Because of nature of the handles, effective sterilization was a problem.

CHAPTER )

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

sterilizing period, dry them thoroughly, and place them
in the instrument cabinet or on the tray setup. Leaving
instruments exposed to moisture for extended periods
or overnight is definitely contraindicated.
The boiling water or autoclave methods of sterilization do not produce discoloration, rust, or corrosion of
stainless steel instruments. However, prolonged immersion in cold disinfectant solutions may cause rust. It is
advisable to leave stainless steel instruments exposed to
moisture only for the recommended time. Dry-heat sterilizers do not rust and corrode carbon steel instruments,
but the high heat may reduce the hardness of the alloy,
which would reduce the ability of the instruments to retain a sharp cutting edge.
The choice of alloy in the hand instrument is up to
the operator, but whichever is selected to suit the immediate needs will soon prove unsatisfactory if
proper manipulation and sterilization are not continually followed.
TERMINOLOGY AND CLASSIFICATION
I nstrument Categories. The hand instruments used
in the dental operatory may be categorized as: (1) cutting (excavators, chisels, and others) or (2) noncutting
(amalgam condensers, mirrors, explorers, probes) . 6 Excavators may be further subdivided into ordinary hatchets, hoes, angle formers, and spoons. Chisels are primarily
used for cutting enamel and may be further subdivided
into straight chisels, curved chisels, bin-angle chisels, enamel
hatchets, and gingival margin trimmers. Other cutting instruments may be subdivided as knives, files, scalers, and
carvers. In addition to the cutting instruments, there is
also a very large group of noncutting instruments (see
Fig. 17-21, D and E).
I nstrument Design. Most hand instruments, regardless of use, are composed of three parts: handle, shank,
and blade (Fig. 7-2). For many noncutting instruments,
the part corresponding to the blade is termed the nib.
The end of the nib, or working surface, is known as the
face. The blade or nib is the working end of the instrument and is connected to the handle by the shank. Some
instruments have a blade on both ends of the handle
and are known as double-ended instruments. The blades
are of many designs and sizes, depending on the function they are to perform.

Handles are available in various sizes and shapes. Early
hand instruments had handles of quite large diameter
and were grasped in the palm of the hand. A large, heavy
handle is not always conducive to delicate manipulation.
In North America, most instrument handles are small in
diameter (5.5 mm) and light. They are commonly eightsided and knurled to facilitate control. In Europe, the
handles are often larger in diameter and tapered.
Shanks serve to connect the handles to the working
ends of the instruments. They are normally smooth,
round, and tapered. Shanks often have one or more
bends to avoid the instrument having a tendency to
twist in use when force is applied.
Enamel and dentin are difficult substances to cut and
require the generation of substantial forces at the tip of
the instrument. Hand instruments must be balanced
and sharp. Balance allows for the concentration of force
onto the blade without causing rotation of the instrument in the grasp. Sharpness concentrates the force onto
a small area of the edge, producing a high stress (see
Mechanical Properties in Chapter 4).
Balance is accomplished by designing the angles of the
shank so that the cutting edge of the blade lies within
the projected diameter of the handle and nearly coincides with the projected axis of the handle (Fig. 7-3; see
also Fig. 7-2). For optimal antirotational design, the
blade edge must not be off axis by more than 1 to 2 mm.
All dental instruments and equipment need to satisfy
this principle of balance.
I nstrument Shank Angles. The functional orientation and length of the blade determines the number of
angles necessary in the shank to balance the instrument.
G.V. Blacks classified instruments based on the number
of shank angles, as mon-angle (one), bin-angle (two), or
triple-angle (three).
Instruments with small, short blades may be easily
designed in mon-angle form, while confining the cutting edge within the required limit. Instruments with
longer blades or more complex orientations may require
two or three angles in the shank to bring the cutting
edge near to the long axis of the handle. Such shanks are
termed contra-angled.
I nstrument Names. Black classified all instruments
by name. In addition, for hand cutting instruments, he
developed a numeric formula to characterize the dimen-

FIG 7-2 Double-ended instrument illustrating three component parts of hand instruments:
blade (a), shank (b), and handle (c).

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

sions and angles of the working end (see the next section for details of the formula). Black's classification systems by instrument name categorized instruments by (1)
function (e.g., scaler, excavator), (2) manner of use (e.g.,
hand condenser), (3) design of the working end (e.g.,
spoon excavator, sickle scaler), or (4) shape of the shank
(e.g., mon-angle, bin-angle, contra-angle). These names
were combined to form the complete description of the instrument (e.g., bin-angle spoon excavator).
Operative Cutting Instrument Formulas. Cutting
instruments have formulas describing the dimensions
and angles of the working end. These are placed on the
handle using a code of three or four numbers separated
by dashes or spaces (e.g., 10-8.5-8-14) (see Fig. 7-3). The
first number indicates the width of the blade or primary
cutting edge in tenths of a millimeter (0.1 mm) (e.g.,
10 = 1 mm). The second number of a four-number code

FIG 7-3 I nstrument shank and blade design (with primary cutting edge positioned close to handle axis to produce balance).
The complete instrument formula (four numbers) is expressed
as the blade width (1) i n 0.1-mm increments, cutting edge angle (2) i n centigrades, blade length (3) i n millimeters, and
blade angle (4) i n centigrades.

indicates the primary cutting edge angle, measured from a
line parallel to the long axis of the instrument handle in
clockwise centigrades. The angle is expressed as a percent of 360 degrees (e.g., 85 = 85% x 360 degrees = 306
degrees). The instrument is positioned so that this number always exceeds 50. If the edge is locally perpendicular to the blade, then this number is normally omitted,
resulting in a three-number code. The third number (second number of a three-number code) indicates the blade
length in millimeters (e.g., 8 = 8 mm). The fourth number (third number of a three-number code) indicates the
blade angle, relative to the long axis of the handle in
clockwise centigrade (e.g., 14 = 50 degrees). For these
measurements, the instrument is positioned so that this
number is always 50 or less. The most commonly used
hand instruments, including those specified in this text,
are shown in Figs. 7-5 through 7-9 with their formulas indicated.
In some instances, an additional number on the handle is the manufacturer's identification number. It
should not be confused with the formula number. It is
simply to assist the specific manufacturer in cataloging
and ordering.
Cutting Instrument Bevels. Most hand cutting instruments have on the end of the blade a single bevel that
forms the primary cutting edge. Two additional edges,
called secondary cutting edges, extend from the primary
edge for the length of the blade (Fig. 7-4). Bibeveled instruments, such as ordinary hatchets, have two bevels
that form the cutting edge (Fig. 7-5, A).
Certain single-beveled instruments, such as spoon
excavators (Fig. 7-6) and gingival margin trimmers (Fig.
7-7, B and C), are used with a scraping or lateral cutting motion. Others, such as enamel hatchets (see Fig.
7-7, A), may be used with a planing or direct cutting
motion, as well as a lateral cutting motion. For such single-beveled designs, the instruments must be made in
pairs, having the bevels on opposite sides of the blade.
Such instruments are designated as right or left beveled
and are indicated by appending the letter R or L to the
instrument formula. To determine whether the instrument has a right or left bevel, the primary cutting edge
is held down and pointing away, and if the bevel appears on the right side of the blade, it is the right instrument of the pair. This instrument, when used in a
scraping motion, is moved from right to left. The opposite holds true for the left instrument of the pair.

FIG 7-4 Chisel blade design showing primary and secondary cutting edges.

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

FIG 7-5 Examples of hand instruments
called excavators (with corresponding
i nstrument formulas). A, Bibeveled ordinary hatchet (3-2-28). B, Hoe (4 /1 2 -1 1/2-22).
C, Angle former (12-85-5-8).

FIG. 7-6 Examples of hand instruments

called spoon excavators (with corresponding instrument formulas). A, Binangle spoon (13-7-14). B, Triple-angle
spoon (13-7-14). C, Spoon (15-7-14).

Thus one instrument is suited for work on one side of
the preparation, and the other is suited for the opposite
side of the preparation.
Most instruments are available with blades and
shanks on both ends of the handle. Such instruments are
termed double-ended. In many cases the right instrument
of the pair is on one end of the handle, and the left instrument is on the other end. Sometimes similar blades

of different widths are placed on double-ended instruments. Single-ended instruments may be safer to use,
but double-ended instruments are more efficient because they reduce instrument exchange.
Instruments having the cutting edge perpendicular to
the axis of the handle (Fig. 7-8), such as bin-angle chisels (see Fig. 7-8, C), those with a slight blade curvature
(Wedelstaedt chisels) (see Fig. 7-8, B), and hoes (see Fig.

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

FIG . 7-7 Examples of hand instruments
called chisels ( with corresponding instrument formulas). A, Enamel hatchet
(10-7-14). B, Gingival margin trimmer
(12 1/2-100-7-14). C, Gingival margin trimmer (12'/2-75-7-14).

FIG 7-8 Examples of hand instruments
called chisels ( with corresponding instrument formulas). A, Straight (12-7-0).
B, Wedelstaedt (11'/2-15-3). C, Bin-angle
(10-7-8).

7-5, B), are single-beveled and not designated as rights
or lefts, but as having a mesial bevel or a distal bevel. If
when one observes the inside of the blade curvature (or
the inside of the angle at the junction of the blade and
shank) the primary bevel is not visible, the instrument
has a distal bevel. Conversely, if the primary bevel can be
seen (from the same viewpoint) the instrument has a
mesial or reverse bevel (see Fig. 7-8).

As previously described, instruments such as chisels
and hatchets have three cutting edges, one primary and
two secondary. These allow cutting in three directions,
as the need presents. The secondary edges permit more
effective cutting than the primary edge in several instances. They are particularly effective in work on the
facial and lingual walls of the proximal portion of a
proximoocclusal tooth preparation. The operator should

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

not forget the usefulness of these secondary cutting
edges because they enhance the use of the instrument.
CUTTING INSTRUMENT APPLICATIONS
The cutting instruments are used to cut hard or soft tissues of the mouth. Excavators are used for removal of
caries and refinement of the internal parts of the preparation. Chisels are used primarily for cutting enamel.
Excavators. The four subdivisions of excavators are:
(1) ordinary hatchets, (2) hoes, (3) angle formers, and
(4) spoons.
An ordinary hatchet excavator has the cutting edge of
the blade directed in the same plane as that of the long
axis of the handle and is bibeveled (see Fig. 7-5, A).
These instruments are used primarily on anterior teeth
for preparing retentive areas and sharpening internal
line angles, particularly in preparations for direct gold
restorations.
The hoe excavator has the primary cutting edge of the
blade perpendicular to the axis of the handle (see Fig.
7-5, B). This type of instrument is used for planing
tooth preparation walls and forming line angles. It is
commonly used in Classes III and V preparations for direct gold restorations. Some sets of cutting instruments
contain hoes with longer and heavier blades, with the
shanks contra-angled. These are intended for use on
enamel or posterior teeth.
A special type of excavator is the angle former (see Fig.
7-5, C). It is used primarily for sharpening line angles

and creating retentive features in dentin in preparation
for gold restorations. It also may be used in placing a
bevel on enamel margins. It is mon-angled and has the
primary cutting edge at an angle (other than 90 degrees)
to the blade. It may be described as a combination of a
chisel and gingival margin trimmer. It is available in
pairs (right and left).
Spoon excavators (see Fig. 7-6) are used for removing
caries and carving amalgam or direct wax patterns. The
blades are slightly curved and the cutting edges are either circular or clawlike. The circular edge is known as
a discoid, whereas the clawlike blade is termed a cleoid
(Fig. 7-9, C and D). The shanks may be bin-angled or
triple-angled to facilitate accessibility.
Chisels. Chisels are intended primarily for cutting
enamel and may be grouped as: (a) straight, slightly
curved, or bin-angle; (b) enamel hatchets; and (c) gingival margin trimmers.
The straight chisel has a straight shank and blade, with
the bevel on only one side. Its primary edge is perpendicular to the axis of the handle. It is similar in design to
a carpenter's chisel (see Fig. 7-8, A). The shank and
blade of the chisel also may be slightly curved (Wedelstaedt design) (see Fig. 7-8, B) or may be bin-angled (see
Fig. 7-8, C. The force used with all these chisels is essentially a straight thrust. There is no need for a right
and left type in a straight chisel, since a 180-degree turn
of the instrument allows for its use on either side of the
preparation. The bin-angle and Wedelstaedt chisels have

FIG . 7-9 Examples of other hand instruments for cutting. A, Finishing knife. B, Alternative fini shing knife design emphasizing secondary cutting edges. C, Dental file. D, Cleoid blade. E, Discoid blade carving amalgam.

CHAPTER)

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

HAND INSTRUMENT TECHNIQUES

the primary cutting edges in a plane perpendicular to
the axis of the handle and may have either a distal bevel
or a mesial (reverse) bevel. The blade with a distal bevel
is designed to plane a wall that faces the blade's inside
surface (see Fig. 7-5, A and B). The blade with a mesial
bevel is designed to plane a wall that faces the blade's
outside surface (see Fig. 7-8, B and C).
The enamel hatchet is a chisel similar in design to the ordinary hatchet except that the blade is larger, heavier, and
is beveled on only one side (see Fig. 7-7, A). It has its cutting edges in a plane that is parallel with the axis of the
handle. It is used for cutting enamel and comes as right
or left types for use on opposite sides of the preparation.
The gingival margin trimmer is designed to produce a
proper bevel on gingival enamel margins of proximoocclusal preparations. It is similar in design to the enamel
hatchet, except the blade is curved (similar to a spoon
excavator), and the primary cutting edge is at an angle
(other than perpendicular) to the axis of the blade (see
Fig. 7-7, B and C). It is made as right and left types. It also
is made so a right and left pair is either a mesial pair or
a distal pair. When the second number in the formula is
90 to 100, the pair is used on the distal gingival margin.
When this number is 85 to 75, the pair is used to bevel
the mesial margin. The 100 and 75 pairs are for inlay/onlay

There are four grasps used with hand instruments:
(1) modified pen, (2) inverted pen, (3) palm-and-thumb,
and (4) modified palm-and-thumb. The pen grasp is not
an acceptable instrument grasp (Fig. 7-10, A).
Modified Pen Grasp. The grasp that permits the
greatest delicacy of touch is the modified pen grasp (see
Fig. 7-10, B). As the name implies, it is similar to that
used in holding a pen, but not identical. Pads of the
thumb, index, and middle fingers contact the instrument, while the tip of the ring finger (or tips of the ring
and little fingers) is placed on a nearby tooth surface of
the same arch as a rest. The palm of the hand generally
is facing away from the operator. The pad of the middle
finger is placed near the topside of the instrument; and
by this finger working with wrist and forearm, cutting
or cleaving pressure is generated on the blade. The instrument should not be allowed to rest on or near the
first joint of the middle finger as in the conventional pen
grasp (see Fig. 7-10, A). Although this latter position
may appear to be more comfortable, it limits the application of pressure. Recall that a balanced instrument design allows the application of suitable force without the
instrument tending to rotate in the fingers (see Fig. 7-3).
I nverted Pen Grasp. The finger positions of the inverted pen grasp are the same as for the modified pen
grasp. However, the hand is rotated so that the palm
faces more toward the operator (Fig. 7-11). This grasp is
used mostly for tooth preparations utilizing the lingual
approach on anterior teeth.
Palm-and-Thumb Grasp. The palm-and-thumb grasp
is similar to that used for holding a knife while paring
the skin from an apple. The handle is placed in the palm
of the hand and grasped by all the fingers, while the
thumb is free of the instrument and the rest is provided

preparations with steep gingival bevels. The 90 and 85 pairs
are for amalgam preparations with gingival enamel bevels
that decline gingivally only slightly. Among other uses for
these instruments is the rounding or beveling of the axiopulpal line angle of two-surface preparations.
Other Cutting Instruments. Other hand cutting instruments, such as the knife, file, and discoid-cleoid
instrument, are used for trimming restorative material
rather than for cutting tooth structure.
Knives, known as finishing knives, amalgam knives,
or gold knives, are designed with a thin, knifelike blade
that is made in various sizes and shapes (see Fig. 7-9, A
and B). Knives are used for trimming excess restorative
material on the gingival, facial, or lingual margins of a
proximal restoration or trimming and contouring the
surface of a Class V restoration. Sharp secondary edges
on the heel aspect of the blade are very useful in a
scrape-pull mode.
Files (see Fig. 7-9, C) also can be used to trim excess
restorative material. They are particularly useful at gingival margins. Blades of files are very thin, and teeth on
the cutting surfaces are short. The teeth of the instrument are designed to make the file either a push or a pull
instrument. Files are manufactured in various shapes
and angles to allow access to restorations.
The discoid-cleoid (see Fig. 7-9, D and E) instrument is
used principally for carving occlusal anatomy in unset
amalgam restorations. It also may be used to trim or
burnish inlay-onlay margins. The working ends of this
instrument are larger than the discoid or cleoid end of
an excavator.

B

A
FIG . 7-10 Pen grasps. A, Conventional pen grasp. Side of middle finger is on writing instrument. B, Modified pen grasp. Correct position of middle finger is near the "topside" of the instrument for good control and cutting pressure. The rest is
tip(s) of ring finger (ring and little fingers) on tooth (teeth) of
same arch. Note gingival wedge (arrow) serving as guard.

C H A PT E R

7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

FIG . 7-11
I nverted pen grasp. Palm faces more toward operator. The rest is similar to that shown for modified pen grasp
(see Fig. 7-10, B).

by supporting the tip of the thumb on a nearby tooth of
the same arch or on a firm, stable structure. For suitable
control, this grasp requires careful utilization during
cutting. An example of an appropriate use is holding a
handpiece for cutting incisal retention for a Class III
preparation on a maxillary incisor (Fig. 7-12).
Modified Palm-and-Thumb Grasp. The modified
palm-and-thumb grasp may be used when it is feasible
to rest the thumb on the tooth being prepared or the adjacent tooth (Fig. 7-13). The handle of the instrument is
held by all four fingers whose pads press the handle
against the distal area of the palm, as well as the pad
and first joint of the thumb. Grasping the handle under
the first joint of the ring and little fingers acts as a stabilizer. This grip fosters control against slippage.
The modified pen and inverted pen grasps are used practi-

The modified palm-and-thumb grasp is
usually used in the area of the maxillary arch and is best
adopted when the dentist is operating from a rear-chair
position.
Rests. A proper instrument grasp must include a firm
rest to steady the hand during operating procedures.
When the modified pen and inverted pen grasps are
used, rests are established by placing the ring or ring and
little fingers on a tooth (or teeth) of the same arch and as
close to the operating site as possible (see Figs. 7-10 and
7-11). The closer the rest areas are to the operating area,
the more reliable they are. When the palm-and-thumb
grasps are used, rests are created by placing the tip of the
thumb on the tooth being operated on, on an adjacent
tooth, or on a convenient area of the same arch (see Figs.
7-12 and 7-13).
In some instances, it is impossible to establish a rest
on tooth structure, and soft tissues must be used. Neither soft tissue rests nor distant hard tissue rests afford
reliable control, and they reduce the force or power that
can be used safely.
Occasionally, it is impossible to establish normal finger rests with the hand holding the instrument. Under
these circumstances, instrument control may be gained
using the forefinger of the opposite hand on the shank
of the instrument or using an indirect rest, (i.e., the operating hand rests on the opposite hand, which rests on a
stable oral structure).
Guards. Guards are hand instruments or other items,
such as interproximal wedges, used to protect soft tissue from contact with sharp cutting or abrasive instruments (see Fig. 7-10, B).
cally universally.

FIG. 7-12

Palm-and-thumb grasp. This grasp has limited use,
such as preparing incisal retention in a Class III preparation on a
maxillary incisor. The rest is tip of thumb on tooth in same arch.

SHARPENING HAND INSTRUMENTS
FIG . 7-13

Modified palm-and-thumb grasp. This modification
allows greater ease of instrument movement and more control against slippage during thrust stroke compared to palmand-thumb grasp. The rest is tip of thumb on tooth being prepared or adjacent tooth. Note how instrument is braced
against pad and end joint of thumb.

Selecting the proper hand cutting instrument and using
the proper instrument grasp mean little if the instrument
is not sharp. Instruments with dull cutting edges cause
more pain, prolong operating time, are less controllable,
and reduce quality and precision in tooth preparation. It
is essential, therefore, that all cutting instruments be

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

sharp. Resharpening requires little time and is very rewarding. The dentist or the assistant should habitually
test for sharpness, and sharpen, when indicated, the
hand instruments before they are placed in the tray
setup, thus preventing delays in starting or completing
an operation (see Sharpness Test).
Many types of sharpening equipment exist, including
stationary sharpening stones, mechanical sharpeners,
and stones that are used in the handpiece. One type or
design usually does not accommodate the full variety of
dental instruments with their various shapes of cutting
edges. For efficient and effective sharpening, the dentist
must seek out the most suitable equipment.
Stationary Sharpening Stones. The most frequently
used sharpening equipment consists of a block or stick
of abrasive material called a "stone." The stone is supported on a firm surface and the instrument is oriented
and held by hand while being stroked against the stone
surface. Stationary stones are often called oilstones because of the common practice of applying a coating of
oil to them as an aid to the sharpening process. Sharpening stones are available in a variety of grits, shapes,
and materials.
Stationary oilstones are available in coarse, medium,
or fine grit. Only a fine grit stone is suitable for the final sharpening of dental instruments to be used for
tooth preparation. Coarse and medium grits may be
used for initial reshaping of a badly damaged instrument or for sharpening other dental equipment such as
bench knives. Coarser stones cut more rapidly but produce a rougher surface. If the use of two or more grits
is required, the coarser is used as little as needed for reshaping, and then the final sharpening is done with a
fine stone.
Stationary stones can be obtained in various shapes
including flat, grooved, cylindric, and tapered. The flat
stones are preferred for sharpening all instruments with
straight cutting edges; the other shapes are most useful
for sharpening instruments with curved cutting edges.
Cylindric stones are used for sharpening instruments
with concave edges, and the tapered stones permit using a portion of the stone with a curvature matching
that of the instrument.
Sharpening stones are made from any of several natural or synthetic materials. The normal manufacturing
process for the synthetic materials involves pressing
carefully sized particles of an abrasive into the desired
shape and heating to form a solid. To retain sharp edges
on the particles, the process must result in a porous material. The properties of the stone depend on the volume
and size of the pores as well as on the composition and
size of the abrasive. Four types of materials are in common use for sharpening stones: Arkansas stone, silicon
carbide, aluminum oxide, and diamond.
Arkansas stone is a naturally occurring mineral containing microcrystalline quartz and traditionally has

been the preferred material for fine sharpening stones. It
is semitranslucent, white or gray in color, and hard
enough to sharpen steel, but not carbide instruments.
Arkansas stones are available in hard and soft varieties.
The hard stone, although it may cut slower, is preferred
because the soft stone scratches and grooves easily, rendering it useless. These stones should be lubricated with
light machine oil before being used. This assists in the
fineness of sharpening, prevents clogging of the stone
pores, and avoids the creation of heat, which alters the
temper of the steel blade. In fact, an Arkansas stone
should be covered with a thin film of oil when stored.
During the sharpening of an instrument, the fine steel
cuttings remain on the stone and tend to fill up the
pores of the stone; therefore, when the stone appears
dirty, it should be wiped with a clean woolen cloth
soaked in oil. If the stone is extremely dirty or difficult
to clean, it may be wiped with a cloth soaked in alcohol.
Silicon carbide (SiC) is widely used as an industrial
abrasive. It is the most commonly used material for
grinding wheels and "sandpapers," as well as for sharpening stones. It is hard enough to cut steel effectively,
but not hard enough to sharpen carbide instruments.
SiC stones are available in many shapes in coarse and
medium grits, but not in fine grits. As a result, they are
not as suitable as other materials for final sharpening of
dental instruments. SiC stones are normally of a dark
color, often black or greenish black. These stones are
moderately porous and require lubrication with a light
oil to prevent clogging.
Aluminum oxide is increasingly used to manufacture
sharpening stones. Aluminum oxide stones commonly
are produced in various textures from different particle sizes of abrasive. Coarse and medium grit stones
generally appear as speckled tan or brownish in color.
Fine grit stones are usually white, have superior properties, and are less porous so that they require less lubrication during use. Either water or light oil is adequate as a lubricant.
Diamond is the hardest available abrasive and is most
effective for cutting and shaping hard materials. It is
the only material routinely capable of sharpening carbide as well as steel instruments. Diamond hones are
small blocks of metal with fine diamond particles impregnated in the surface. The diamonds are held in
place by an electroplated layer of corrosion-resistant
metal. Most hones include grooved and rounded surfaces, as well as a straight surface, and are adaptable for
sharpening instruments with curved blades. These
hones are nonporous, but the use of a lubricant will extend the life of the hones. They may be cleaned with a
mild detergent and a medium-bristle brush.
Mechanical Sharpeners. As high-speed rotary cutting instruments have been improved and their use has
increased, the use of hand cutting instruments and the
need for resharpening has decreased. As a result, some

CHAPTER7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

dental office personnel do not do enough hand sharpening to remain confident of their proficiency. Under
such circumstances the use of a powered mechanical
sharpener is of benefit.
The Rx Honing Machine is an example of a mechanical sharpener (Fig. 7-14). Basically this instrument
moves a hone in a reciprocating motion at a slow speed,
while the instrument is held at the appropriate angulation and supported by a rest. This is much easier than
having to hold the instrument at the proper angulation
while moving it relative to the hone. Interchangeable
aluminum oxide hones of different shapes and coarseness are available to accommodate the various instrument sizes, shapes, and degrees of dullness. Restoration
of the cutting edge is accomplished more easily and in
less time than by other sharpening methods. This type
of sharpener is also very versatile and, with available
accessories, can fill almost all instrument sharpening
needs.
Handpiece Sharpening Stones. Mounted SiC and
aluminum oxide stones for use with both straight and angle handpieces are available in various sizes and shapes
(see Other Abrasive Instruments). Those intended for use
in straight handpieces, particularly the cylindric instruments with straight-sided silhouettes, are more useful for
sharpening hand instruments than are the smaller points
intended for intraoral use in the angle handpieces.
Because of their curved periphery, it is difficult to produce a flat surface using any of these instruments. These
stones also may produce somewhat inconsistent results
because of the speed variables and the usual lack of a rest
or guide for the instrument. However, satisfactory results
can be obtained with minimal practice, especially on instruments with curved blades.
Principles of Sharpening. The majority of operative
hand cutting instruments can be sharpened successfully on either a stationary stone or the mechanical
sharpener. The secret to easy and successful sharpening
is to sharpen the instrument at the first sign of dullness
and not wait until the edge is completely lost. If this
procedure is followed, a fine cutting edge is restored
with a few strokes on a stationary stone or a light touch
to the mechanical sharpener. At the same time, operating efficiency is not reduced by attempting to use an instrument that is getting progressively duller.
The choice of equipment used for sharpening is up to
the dentist. In the use of any equipment, several basic
principles of sharpening should be followed:
1. Sharpen instruments only after they have been
cleaned and sterilized.
2. Establish the proper bevel angle (usually 45 degrees)
and the desired angle of the cutting edge to the blade
before placing the instrument against the stone, and
maintain these angles while sharpening.

3. Use a light stroke or pressure against the stone to
minimize frictional heat.
4. Use a rest or guide whenever possible.
5. Remove as little metal from the blade as possible.
6. Lightly hone the unbeveled side of the blade after
sharpening, to remove the fine bur that may be
created.
7. After sharpening, resterilize the instrument along
with other items on the instrument tray setup.
8. Keep the sharpening stones clean and free of metal
cuttings.
Mechanical Techniques.

When chisels, hatchets,
hoes, angle formers, or gingival margin trimmers are
sharpened on a reciprocating honing sharpener, the
blade is placed against the steady rest, and the proper
angle of the cutting edge of the blade is established before starting the motor. Light pressure of the instrument
against the reciprocating hone is maintained with a firm
grasp on the instrument. A trace of metal debris on the
face of a flat hone along the length of the cutting edge is
an indication that the entire cutting edge is contacting
the hone (see Fig. 7-14, B).
The mechanical sharpener is easily mastered with a
little practice and is a quick method of sharpening hand
instruments. Regardless of the type of mechanical sharpener used, the associated instructions for use should be
thoroughly understood before an attempt is made to
sharpen any type of instrument.
Handpiece stones are used chiefly for instruments
with curved blades, especially for the inside curve of
such blades. The handpiece should be run at a low
speed. The instrument is held lightly against the stone
with a modified pen grasp, and, whenever possible, the
ring and little fingers of each hand should be touching
each other to act as a rest or steadying force. When this
method of sharpening is used, care must be exercised
not to overheat the instrument being sharpened. The
use of some form of lubricant or coolant is desirable. If
oil is used, care should be exercised not to throw oil
from the stone during sharpening, and the stone should
be reserved for future sharpening use only.
An instrument such as an amalgam or gold knife has a
wide blade with a very narrow edge bevel, unlike the
wide bevel of a chisel or hatchet. It is difficult to maintain
the narrow edge bevel by using a mechanical sharpener
or a handpiece stone. This type of instrument should be
sharpened on a stationary stone.
Stationary Stone Techniques. The stationary sharpening stone should be at least 2 inches wide and 5 inches
long, since a smaller stone is impractical. It also should
be of medium grit for hand cutting instruments. Before
the stone is used, a thin film of light oil should be placed
on the working surface. In addition to establishing the
proper 45-degree angle of the bevel and the cutting edge

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

FIG . 7-14 Type of mechanical sharpener. A, R x Honing Machine System II has two spindle
drives, one clockwise and the other counterclockwise, to which can be mounted diamond abrasive disk (a), RSC (rubberized SiC) disk (b), or leather polishing disk; hone (reciprocating) carriage (c) to which can be mounted vitreous alumina (coarse) or ceramic alumina (fine) abrasive
hone (d); angle guide (see B) slides onto bar (e); knob for selecting disk or hone drive (f); speed
control knob (g); on/off switch (h); and foot activating switch (i). B, Sharpening enamel hatchet.
Note instrument guide on bar, and track of sharpening debris on reciprocating (two-headed
arrow), ceramic hone. Track width should equal length of cutting edge. C, Sharpening cleoid
carver on same hone. D and E, Sharpening discoid carver on snap-in round, reciprocating
(two-headed arrow), ceramic hone. Note track of sharpening debris as instrument is moved in
arc by operator around hone (arrows) to sharpen desired length of blade edge. F, Sharpening
small discoid excavator on grooved, reciprocating (two-headed arrow), ceramic hone. Again
note operator arcing movement of blade (arrows) i n hone to sharpen desired length of cutting
edge.

CHAPTER

7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

to the stone, several fundamental rules apply to using the
stationary stone:
1. Lay the stone on a flat surface and do not tilt the
stone while sharpening.
2. Grasp the instrument firmly, usually with a modified
pen grasp, so it will not rotate or change angles while
being sharpened.
3. To ensure stability during the sharpening strokes, use
the ring and little fingers as a rest, and guide along a
flat surface or along the stone. This prevents rolling
or dipping of the instrument, which results in a distorted and uneven bevel.
4. Use a light stroke to prevent the creation of heat and
the scratching of the stone.
5. Use different areas of the stone's surface while sharpening because this helps prevent the formation of
grooves on the stone that impair efficiency and accuracy of the sharpening procedure.
When sharpening chisels, hatchets, or hoes on the stationary stone, grasp the instrument with a modified pen
grasp, place the blade perpendicular to the stone, and
then tilt the instrument to establish the correct bevel
(Fig. 7-15). Establishing and maintaining this correct
bevel is the most difficult part of sharpening on a stationary stone. One method that assists in establishing
the proper bevel angle is to observe the oil on the stone
while the instrument is tilted, in an effort to establish
contact between the entire bevel and the stone. When oil
is expressed evenly on all sides, then the entire bevel is
touching the stone and the proper angle has been established to proceed with the sharpening strokes. If this
alignment is altered during sharpening, discrepancies
of the cutting edge and bevel will result. Using the finger rests and guides as illustrated in Fig. 7-15, the operator can slide the instrument back and forth along the
stone. The motivating force should be from the shoulder

so that the relationship of the hand to the plane of the
stone is not changed during the stroke. Another technique is to move the stone back and forth while maintaining a constant position of the instrument.
The procedure for sharpening angle formers is essentially the same as that used for chisels, hatchets, or hoes,
except that allowance must be made for the angle of the
cutting edge to the blade.
Gingival margin trimmers require more orientation of
the cutting edge to the stone before sharpening than a
regular hatchet does. However, the same principle of establishing the proper bevel angle and cutting edge angle
is the criterion for instrument position before sharpening. It may be expedient to use a palm-and-thumb grasp
when sharpening a trimmer with a 95- or 100-centigrade
cutting edge angle (Fig. 7-16).
When single-bevel instruments are sharpened, a thin,
rough ridge of distorted metal, called a burr or burr-edge,
collects on the unbeveled side of the blade. This burr is
eliminated by a light stroke of the unbeveled side of the
blade over the stone. This side of the blade is placed flat
on the stone, and one short forward stroke is made.
Burring can be kept to a minimum, however, if the direction of the sharpening stroke is only against the cutting edge of the blade, and the cutting edge does not
contact the stone during the return stroke. Thus, the
blade is touching the stone only on the forward sharpening stroke.

FIG . 7-16

Sharpening gingival margin tri mmer. Palm-andthumb grasp may be used while holding stone in opposite
hand to establish proper cutting edge angle.

FIG. 7-15

Sharpening an instrument. Maintaining proper angle of bevel and angle of cutting edge to stone is aided by resti ng fingertips on stone.

f I G 7-17

Sharpening amalgam or gold knife. Place stone at
edge of table so that blade may be tilted to form an acute angle with stone. Direction of sharpening movement of instrument along stone is indicated by arrow.

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

The amalgam or gold knife has a very thin blade tapering to the sharpened edge. There is a narrow edge
bevel on both sides of the blade. In sharpening this instrument, only the edge bevels should be honed. If the
entire side of the blade is worked each time, the thin
blade will soon disappear or become so thin that it will
fracture under the slightest pressure. To sharpen the
amalgam or gold knife, the blade is placed on the stone
with the junction of the blade and shank immediately

Sharpening a spoon excavator. A, Beginning of
stroke. B, Continuation of pull stroke while rotating handle in
a direction opposite the stroke. C, Completion of stroke and
handle rotation. Note that finger guides are used during entire
stroke, which is in direction indicated by arrow.
FIG . 7-18

over the edge of the stone. The blade is then tilted to
form a small acute angle with the surface of the stone,
and the stroke is straight along the stone and toward
the edge of the blade only (Fig. 7-17). The sharpening
is accomplished on both sides of the blade, with the
stroke always toward the blade edge. This method produces the finest edge and eliminates any burrs on the
cutting edge.
The most difficult instruments to sharpen on a flat
stone are the spoon excavators and discoids. Only the
rounded outside surface of the spoon can be honed satisfactorily on a flat stone, and this involves a rotary
movement accompanied by a pull stroke to maintain the
curvature of the edge. The spoon is placed on the far end
of the stone and held so that the handle is pointing toward the operator. As the instrument is pulled along the
stone toward the operator, the handle is rotated gradually away from the operator, until it is pointing away
from the operator at the end of the stroke. The instrument is picked up and placed at the far end of the stone,
and the motion is repeated until the edge is honed. The
stone either may be placed on a flat surface or held in the
hand for this procedure (Fig. 7-18). To hone the flat inside
surface of the blade, a small cylindric stone is passed
back and forth over the surface (Fig. 7-19).
Other means of sharpening spoon excavators are
achieved by using a grooved stone, mounted discs, or
stones for use with a straight handpiece. However, there
is a tendency to remove too much metal when handpiece stones are used.
Sharpness Test. Sharpness of an instrument can be
tested by lightly resting the cutting edge on a hard plastic surface. If the cutting edge digs in during an attempt
to slide the instrument forward over the surface, the instrument is sharp. If it slides, the instrument is dull. Only
very light pressure is exerted in testing for sharpness.
The principles and techniques discussed provide sufficient background for the operator to use proper methods in sharpening other instruments not discussed. It
cannot be overemphasized that sharp instruments are necessary for optimal operating procedures. It also has been

7-19
Use of a small cylinder stone to hone inside surface
of spoon excavators and discoid-cleoid instruments. NOTE:
Gloving is not illustrated in Figs. 7-15 to 7-19 because sharpening is accomplished after sterilizing the washed instrument;
after sharpening the instrument, it is sterilized again.
FIG

CHAPTER

7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

found prudent to have multiple tray setups so that a
substitute instrument is available if necessary; or substitute sterile instruments should be available so that other
sterile tray setups are not disrupted by the borrowing of
instruments.
STERILIZATION AND STORAGE OF
HAND CUTTING INSTRUMENTS
Because hepatitis A and B viruses have been found in the
saliva of infected persons and evidence indicates that
many dental personnel have hepatitis B infections, the
importance of proper equipment and procedures for instrument sterilization must be emphasized. Sterilization
in dental offices can be accomplished by autoclaving,
dry-heat procedures, ethylene oxide equipment, and
chemical vapor sterilizers. Boiling and chemical solutions (cold disinfection) do not sterilize instruments and
should be considered as disinfection procedures only.
The belief that only those instruments that puncture or
cut soft tissue or are exposed to blood should be sterilized, and others only disinfected, is no longer valid as a
precaution against cross-infections. Aseptic techniques
are presented in other subject areas and are not be detailed here. Sterilization procedures for operative dentistry are presented in Chapter 8. Storage of any hand
cutting instrument should be in a sterile, wrapped tray
setup or in an individual sterile wrapping.

ered cutting equipment can be seen as a search for improved sources of energy and means for holding and
controlling the cutting instrument. This has culminated
in the use of replaceable bladed or abrasive instruments
held in a rotary handpiece, usually powered by compressed air.
A handpiece is a device for holding rotating instruments, transmitting power to them, and for positioning
them intraorally. Handpieces and associated cutting and
polishing instruments developed as two basic types,
straight and angle (Fig. 7-22). Most of the development of
methods for preparing teeth has occurred within the last
100 years. Effective equipment for removal (or preparation) of enamel has been available only since 1947, when
speeds of 10,000 rpm were first used, along with newly
marketed carbide burs and diamond instruments. Since
1953, continued improvements in the design and materials of construction for both handpieces and instruments
have resulted in equipment that is efficient and sterilizeable, much to the credit of manufacturers and the profes-

POWERED CUTTING EOUIPMEN
DEVELOPMENT OF ROTARY EQUIPMENT
The availability of some method of cutting and shaping
of tooth structure is essential for the restoration of teeth.
Although archeological evidence of dental treatment
dates from as early as 5000 BC, little is known about the
equipment and methods used then. 14 Early drills powered by hand are illustrated in Figs. 7-20 and 7-21. Much
of the subsequent development leading to present pow-

f I G 7-20

Early straight hand drill for direct access preparations (circa 1800). Back end of bur shank fits into a finger ring
while the front end is rotated with thumb and forefinger.

FIG 7-21

Early angle hand drill for indirect access preparations (circa 1850). The bur is activated by squeezing the
spring-loaded handle.

f I G 7-22 Conventional designs of handpieces. A, Belt-driven
straight handpiece. B, Gear-driven angle handpiece that attaches to front end of the straight handpiece. C, Gear-driven angle handpiece designed for cleaning and polishing procedures.

CHAPTER

7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

sion alike. Table 7-1 summarizes some of the more significant developments of rotary dental equipment.
One of the most significant advancements was the introduction of the electric motor as a power source in 1874.
It was incorporated into a dental unit in 1914.35 The initial handpiece equipment and operating speeds (maximum of 5000 rpm) remained virtually unchanged until

1946 (Fig. 7-23). The steel burs used at the time could
not cut enamel effectively, even when applied with
great force. With steel burs, increased speed and power
resulted only in increased heat and instrument wear.
Further progress was delayed until the development of
instruments that could cut enamel. Diamond cutting instruments were developed in Germany around 1935,
but were scarce in the United States until after World
War 11. In a 10-year period, starting in late 1946, cutting
techniques were revolutionized. Diamond instruments
and tungsten carbide burs capable of cutting enamel were
produced commercially. Both instruments performed
best at the highest speeds available and that prompted
the development of higher speed handpieces. Obtaining
speeds of 10,000 to 15,000 rpm was a relatively simple
matter of modifying existing equipment by enlarging
the drive pulleys on the dental engine. By 1950, speeds
of 60,000 rpm and above had been attained by newly
designed equipment employing speed-multiplying internal belt drives (Fig. 7-24). 34 They were found to be
more effective for cutting tooth structure and for reducing perceived vibration.
The major breakthrough in the development of highspeed rotary equipment came with the introduction of
contra-angled handpieces with internal turbine drives in the
contra-angle head .Z9 Early units were water driven but
subsequent units were air driven (Figs. 7-25 and 7-26, A).
Although most current air-turbine handpieces (Fig. 7-27)
have free-running speeds of approximately 300,000 rpm,
the small size of the turbine in the head limits their
power output. The speed can drop to 200,000 rpm or less,
with small lateral workloads during cutting, and the
handpiece may stall at moderate loads . 36 This tendency
to stall under high loads is an excellent safety feature for
tooth preparation, since excessive pressure cannot be
applied. Air-driven handpieces continue to be the most
popular type of handpiece equipment because of the
overall simplicity of design, ease of control, versatility,
and patient acceptance. The external appearance of current handpieces is very similar to the earliest models.
The low torque and power output of the contra-angle
turbines made them unsuitable for some finishing and

FIG

FIG 7-24 Page-Chayes handpiece (circa 1955). The first beltdriven angle handpiece to operate successfully at speeds over
100,000 rpm.

7-23 Typical equipment when an electric motor is used as
source of power: foot control with rheostat (w), belt-driven
straight handpiece (x), three-piece adjustable extension arm
( y), and electric motor (z).

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

polishing techniques, where large heavy instruments are
needed. The application of the turbine principle to the
straight handpiece eliminated the necessity of having an
electric engine as part of a standard dental unit. The design of the straight handpiece turbine provided the desirable high torque for low-speed operation (see Fig. 7-26, B).
Increasing concern about patient-to-patient transfer of
infectious agents has put emphasis on other aspects of
handpiece performance. Recent advancements in both
straight and angle handpieces allow repeated sterilization by several methods (see Chapter 8). However sterilization produces some damage to parts of the handpiece, thus necessitating more frequent service and
repair. Other improvements of the angle handpiece in-

FIG. 7-25 Turbo-Jet portable unit (circa 1955). A small turbine
i n the head of the angle handpiece is driven by water circul ated by a pump housed in the mobile base.

clude smaller head sizes, more torque, lower noise levels, and better chucking mechanisms. Since 1955, angle
handpieces have had an air-water spray feature to provide cooling, cleansing, and improved visibility
(see
Fig. 7-27). Most modern-angled handpieces also include
fiber-optic lighting of the cutting site (see Fig. 7-27, B).
ROTARY SPEED RANGES
The rotational speed of an instrument is measured in revolutions per minute (rpm). Three speed ranges are generally recognized: low or slow speeds (below 12,000 rpm),
medium or intermediate speeds (12,000 to 200,000 rpm),
and high or ultrahigh speeds (above 200,000 rpm). The
terms low-speed, medium-speed, and high-speed are used
preferentially in this textbook. Most useful instruments
are rotated at either low or high speed.
The crucial factor for some purposes is the surface
speed of the instrument, the velocity at which the edges
of the cutting instrument pass across the surface being
cut. This is proportional to both the rotational speed
and the diameter of the instrument, with large instruments having higher surface speeds at any given rate
of rotation.
Although intact tooth structure can be removed by an
instrument rotating at low speeds, it is a traumatic experience for both the patient and the dentist. Low-speed
cutting is ineffective, time consuming, and requires a
relatively heavy force application. This results in heat
production at the operating site and produces vibrations of low frequency and high amplitude. Heat and vibration are the main sources of patient discomfort. At
low speeds, burs have a tendency to roll out of the tooth
preparation and mar the proximal margin or tooth surface. In addition, carbide burs do not last long because
their brittle blades are easily broken at low speeds.
Many of these disadvantages of low-speed operation do
not apply when the objective is some procedure other
than cutting tooth structure. The low-speed range is used
for cleaning teeth, occasional caries excavation, and finishing
and polishing procedures. At low speeds, tactile sensation
is better and there is generally less chance for overheating cut surfaces. The availability of a low-speed option
is a valuable adjunct for many dental procedures.
At high speed, the surface speed needed for efficient
cutting can be attained with smaller and more versatile
cutting instruments. This speed is used for tooth prepa-

7-26 Air-turbine handpiece. A, Borden Airotor handpiece (circa 1957) was first clinically
successful air-turbine handpiece. Current air-driven handpieces are very similar in basic design. B, Air-turbine straight handpiece (circa 1980).
FIG

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

ration and removing old restorations. Other advantages
are: (1) diamond and carbide cutting instruments remove tooth structure faster with less pressure, vibration, and heat generation; (2) the number of rotary cutting instruments needed is reduced because smaller
sizes are more universal in application; (3) the operator
has better control and greater ease of operation; (4) instruments last longer; (5) patients are generally less apprehensive because annoying vibrations and operating
time are decreased; and (6) several teeth in the same arch
can and should be treated at the same appointment.
Variable control to regulate the speed makes the
handpiece more versatile. This allows the operator to
easily obtain the optimal speed for the size and type of
rotating instrument at any stage of a specific operation.
For infection control, all dental handpieces are now
sterilized, but the process is accompanied with some
challenges. Continual sterilization can produce degradation in clinical performance (longevity, power, turbine speed, fiber-optic transmission, eccentricity, noise,
chuck performance, visibility angle, interocclusal clearance, water spray pattern) . Most handpieces require re-

oiling after sterilization, and excess oil may be sprayed
during the start-up operation. It is therefore recommended to run the handpiece for a few seconds before
initiating a dental procedure in which the deposition of
oil spray onto tooth structure might interfere with processes, such as dental adhesion.
LASER EQUIPMENT
Lasers are devices that produce beams of coherent and
very high intensity light. A large number of current and
potential uses of lasers in dentistry have been identified
that involve the treatment of soft tissues and the modification of hard tooth structures . The word laser is an
acronym for "light amplification by stimulated emission of
radiation." A crystal or gas is excited to emit light photons of a characteristic wavelength that are amplified
and filtered to make a coherent light beam. The effects
of the laser depend on the power of the beam and the
extent to which the beam is absorbed.
Several types are available (Table 7-2) based on wavelengths. The lasers range from long wavelengths (infrared), through visible wavelengths, to short wavelengths

Laser Types by Source and Wavelength

f I G .7-27 Contemporary air-turbine handpiece (circa 1994). Most handpieces are being redesigned to withstand the rigors of routine sterilization. A, Contrangle air-turbine handpiece
connected to air-water supply line. B, Ventral view of handpiece (Star 430SWL) showing port for
air-water spray (s) onto bur at cutting site, and epoxied end of fiber-optic bundle (I) to shine light
at cutting site.

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

(ultraviolet). Excimers are special ultraviolet lasers. At
the present time, CO,, Nd:YAG, and Er:YAG lasers have
shown the most promise. For any application it is important to select the correct wavelength for absorption
of the energy and prevention of side effects from heat
generation.
Scientific and commercial lasers produce highly collimated beams, but such a beam is potentially dangerous
in clinical situations. The collimated beam is directed
via a flexible fiber-optic light pipe or mirror train to the
point of application, where it is normally focused by a
lens to a focal area near the tip.
Once the beam is focused, the total energy it delivers
is a function of the intensity of the beam, the time of exposure, and the area affected. These are used to calculate the exposure dose (ED, joules/cm2). ED = (W)(t)/
( A) where W is the power (watts) emitted from the light
guide, t is the time (seconds) of the total exposure, and
A is the area (cm2) of the beam spot on the substrate . 26

The effect of this energy depends on whether or not the
wavelength of the energy is absorbed by the surface. The
absorption wavelengths for various hard and soft tissues
are different. The best results are obtained when the laser
wavelength is matched to an absorption band of the substrate. In some cases, the substrate must be coated with
an absorbing dye to facilitate beam interaction.
Interactions with the substrate can occur in photothermal, photochemical, or other ways. Generally, dental
lasers produce photothermal effects, with soft or hard
tissue being ablated by the action. At low temperatures,
below 100° C, thermal effects denature proteins, produce
hemolysis, and cause coagulation and shrinkage. Above
100° C, water in soft or hard tissues boils, producing
explosive expansion. Above approximately 400° C, carbonization of organic materials is completed with the
onset of some inorganic changes. As the temperature increases from 400° to 1400° C, inorganic constituents
change in chemistry, may melt and/or recrystallize, and

FIG . 7-28 Example of laser use. A, Nd:YAG laser unit with a power supply, control panel,
fiber-optic wave guide, and probe. B, Laser probe and beam emanating from probe tip.
C, Lased area on dentin (from Nd:YAG operated at 1.06 gm wavelength, 167 mJ/pulse,
and 207 J/cm 2 power) showing physical modification produced by a single pulse. The hydroxyapatite crystals on the surface were melted and recrystallized with partial closure
of the tubules. Surface roughness from tooth preparation was eliminated by the lasing.
The area immediately adjacent to the lased site seemed to be unaffected. (A, Courtesy of
American Dental Technologies, Inc., 5555 Bear Lane, Corpus Christi, Tex.; B, Courtesy of
Dr. Art Vassiliadis, Sunrise Technologies, Freemont, Calif.; C, Courtesy of Dr. Joel White,
Department of Restorative Dentistry, UCSF School of Dentistry, San Francisco, Calif.)

A

B

C H A PT E R )

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

may vaporize. The actual temperatures depend on the
initial composition of the tissue involved. When the laser
and tissue are well matched, like the infrared lasers and
enamel, energy can be absorbed very rapidly. Even low
energy densities for short times can cause enamel to melt
and recrystallize. High energy densities and/or longer
times produce vaporization with drilling or cutting of
the surface. For dentin, the same effects occur at lower
energy densities. An example of lased dentin is shown in
Fig. 7-28. Such surfaces can be produced to seal the
dentin and assist bonding of restorative materials.
While infrared lasers produce their effects by heating
at the focal point, ultraviolet laser beams involve photon energies coincident with bond energies of cellular
constituents and are capable of directly disrupting the
bonds that hold the molecules together." For this reason, it is necessary to avoid those wavelengths that are
absorbed by proteins such as DNA and RNA.
For dental applications, excessive heat must be
avoided to protect the dental pulp. High surface temperatures for short periods of time are acceptable, as
long as there is sufficient time or path for heat dispersion. Lasers may be operated as continuous wave (cw)
or pulsed (p) lasers. To control the beam energy, it is
common to pulse the beam. Normally the operator can
select the pulse rate (20 to 1000 Hertz or cycles per second) and pulse duration (1 to 50 microseconds). Pulsing
occurs rapidly and is not the same as the operator turning the beam on or off. Local temperatures during lasing
can reach many hundreds of degrees Celsius, but as
long as the heat is dissipated effectively, pulpal temperatures will not be affected. Clinical studies indicate that
lasers can be used correctly without causing pulpal
damage . 33 Generally, pulpal temperature increases of
more than 4.5° to 5.5° C are considered damaging.
Several lasers are of practical importance to medicine
and dentistry (Table 7-3). The ones of most current interest to dentistry are Nd:YAG (Neodymium:yttriumaluminum-garnet; wavelength = 1.064 um; see Fig. 7-28,
A), Er:YAG (Erbium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet; wavelength = 2.94 um), Or CO2 (carbon dioxide; maximum

wavelength = 10.6 um). Argon, helium-neon, Ho:YAG,
and excimer lasers are being evaluated as well. A laser
may produce more than one wavelength of photon energy. In the case of CO2 lasers, the 9.6 um peak is much
more readily absorbed by hydroxyapatite than the standard 10.6 um peak. This wavelength may be selected by
filtration to eliminate longer wavelengths.
It is no longer a question of whether lasers will be used
by dentistry but rather when they will become commonplace. Current units are relatively expensive and must be
used frequently in a dental practice to justify the expense. At the moment, lasers are used primarily for either soft tissue applications (see Table 7-3) or hard tissue
surface modification (see Fig 7-28, C. They generally are
not used for tooth preparations because they are inefficient and awkward for removing large amounts of
enamel or dentin, and that process with a laser can generate intolerable amounts of heat. Therefore lasers may
never replace a high-speed dental handpiece. However,
at least one commercial Ho:YAG laser instrument has
been approved by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) for use with hard tissues in primary teeth .25
Special safety precautions are prescribed when using
a laser. A door is required to close off the room where
lasers are being used, and appropriate signs are needed
to indicate the presence of laser equipment. Eye protection is required for the operator, assistant, and patient to
protect against any inadvertently reflected laser light.
The FDA will most likely expand the number of sanctioned applications in the near future.

OTHER EQUIPMENT
Alternative methods of cutting enamel and/or dentin
have been assessed periodically. In the mid-1950s, airabrasive cutting was tested, but several clinical problems precluded general acceptance. Most importantly,
no tactile sense was associated with air-abrasive cutting
of tooth structure. This made it difficult for the operator
to determine the cutting progress within the tooth preparation. Additionally, the abrasive dust interfered with
visibility of the cutting site and tended to mechanically

CHAPTER

7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

etch the surface of the dental mirror. Preventing the patient or office personnel from inhaling abrasive dust
posed an additional difficulty.
Contemporary air-abrasion equipment (Fig. 7-29) is
helpful for stain removal, debriding pit and fissures prior

F I G . 7-29

Example of contemporary air-abrasion unit for removal of superficial enamel defects or stains, debriding pits
and fissures for sealant application, or roughening surfaces to
be bonded or luted. (Courtesy of Lares Research, Chico, Calif.)

FIG 7-30

Schematic representation of range of variables associated with any type of air-abrasion equipment. The cleaning or cutting action is a function of
kinetic energy imparted to the actual surface, and
this is affected by variables concerning the particle
size, air pressure, angulation with surface, type of
substrate, and method of clearance. (Courtesy of
Barbara Kunselman (Master's thesis, 19991, School
of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC.)

FIG . 7-31

Example of air-abrasion equipment used for tooth
cleaning (Cavitron Jet, Dentsply Professional) showing the prophy tip and handle attached by a flexible cord to the control unit
with the reservoir of powder and source of water. (Courtesy of
Dentsply Professional, 1301 Smile Way, York, PA, 17404-0807,
phone: (8001989-8826)

to sealing, and micro-mechanical roughening of surfaces
to be bonded (enamel, cast metal alloys, or porcelain) . 4
This approach works well when organic material is being
removed and when only a limited amount of enamel or
dentin is involved. Although promoted for caries excavation, air abrasion can not produce well-defined preparation wall and margin details that are possible with conventional rotary cutting techniques. Generally, the finest
stream of abrading particles still generates an effective
cutting width of at least 350 Um, far greater than the
width of luted cement margins or the errors tolerable in
most caries excavations. Roughening of surfaces to be
bonded, luted, or repaired is an advantage, and can occur
intraorally or extraorally, depending on the situation.
However, roughening by air abrasion by itself is not a
substitute for acid-etching techniques. While roughening
i mproves bonding, acid-etching alone, or after roughening always produces a better bond than air abrasion
roughening alone .34
Air abrasion techniques rely on the transfer of kinetic
energy from a stream of powder particles on the surface
of tooth structure or a restoration to produce a fractured
Air abrasion techniques rely on the transfer of kinetic energy from a stream of powder particles on the surface of
tooth structure or a restoration to produce a fractured
surface layer, resulting in roughness for bonding or dis-

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

ruption for cutting. The energy transfer event is affected
by many things, including powder particle, pressure, angulation, surface composition, and clearance angle variables (Fig. 7-30). The most common error for operators of
air abrasion units is to hold the tip at the wrong distance
from the surface, for the desired action. Greater distances
significantly reduce the energy of the stream .22 Short distances may produce unwanted cutting actions, such as
when only surface stain removal is being attempted. The
potential for unwanted cutting is a significant problem
when employing an air-polishing device (e.g., Prophy
jet) to clean the surfaces of dentin and enamel .3,7,12,31
However, when used properly, units designed for airpolishing tooth surfaces can be quite efficient and effective (Fig. 7-31).

ROTARY CUTTING INSTRUMENTS
The individual instruments intended for use with dental handpieces are manufactured in hundreds of sizes,
shapes, and types. This variation is in part a result of the
need for specialized designs for particular clinical applications or to fit particular handpieces, but much of
the variation also results from individual preferences on
the part of dentists. Since the introduction of high-speed
techniques in clinical practice, a rapid evolution of technique and an accompanying proliferation of new instrument designs have occurred. Nevertheless, the number
of instruments essential for use with any one type of
handpiece is comparatively small, especially in the case
of high-speed turbine handpieces.

COMMON DESIGN CHARACTERISTICS
In spite of the great variation among rotary cutting instruments, they have certain design features in common. Each instrument consists of three parts: (1) shank,
(2) neck, and (3) head (Fig. 7-32). Each has its own function, influencing its design and the materials used for its
construction. Note that there is a difference in the mean-

ing of the term "shank" as applied to rotary instruments
and to hand instruments.
Shank Design. The shank is the part that fits into the
handpiece, accepts the rotary motion from the handpiece, and provides a bearing surface to control the
alignment and concentricity of the instrument. The
shank design and dimensions vary with the handpiece
for which it is intended. The American Dental Association Specification No. 23 for dental excavating burs' includes five classes of instrument shanks. Three of these
(Fig. 7-33), the straight handpiece shank, the latch-type angle handpiece shank, and the friction-grip angle handpiece
shank, are commonly encountered. The shank portion of
the straight handpiece instrument is a simple cylinder. It
is held in the handpiece by a metal chuck that accepts a
range of shank diameters. Therefore precise control of
the shank diameter is not as critical as for other shank
designs. Straight handpiece instruments are now rarely
used for preparing teeth, except for caries excavation.
However, they are commonly used for finishing and
polishing completed restorations.
The more complicated shape of the latch-type shank
reflects the different mechanisms by which these instruments are held in the handpiece. Their shorter overall
length permits substantially improved access to posterior regions of the mouth in comparison with straight
handpiece instruments. Handpieces that use latch-type
burs normally have a metal bur tube within which the
instruments fit as closely as possible, while still permitting easy interchange. The posterior portion of the shank
is flattened on one side so that the end of the instrument
fits into a D-shaped socket at the bottom of the bur tube,
causing the instrument to be rotated. Latch-type instruments are not retained in the handpiece by a chuck, but
rather by a retaining latch that slides into the groove
found at the shank end of the instrument. This type of
instrument is used predominantly at low and medium
speed ranges for finishing procedures. At these speeds,

FIG. 7-33 Characteristics and typical dimensions (in inches) of three common instrument shank designs for (A) straight
handpiece, (B) latch-angle handpiece, and
( C) friction-grip angle handpiece type.

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

the small amount of potential wobble inherent in the
clearance between the instrument and the handpiece
bur tube is controlled by the lateral pressure exerted during cutting procedures. At higher speeds, the latch-type
shank design is inadequate to provide a true-running
instrument head, and as a result, an improved shank design is required for these speeds.
The friction-grip shank design was developed for use
with high-speed handpieces. This design is smaller in
overall length than the latch-type instruments, providing a further improvement in access to the posterior regions of the mouth. The shank is a simple cylinder manufactured to very close dimensional tolerances. As the
name implies, friction-grip instruments originally were
designed to be held in the handpiece by friction between the shank and a plastic or metal chuck. Newer
handpiece designs have metal chucks that close to make
a positive contact with the bur shank. Careful dimensional control on the shanks of these instruments is important, because for high-speed use, even minor variations in shank diameter can cause substantial variation
in instrument performance and problems with insertion, retention, and removal.
Neck Design. As shown in Fig. 7-32, the neck is the
intermediate portion of an instrument that connects the
head to the shank. It corresponds to the part of a hand
instrument called the shank. Except in the case of the
larger, more massive instruments, the neck normally tapers from the shank diameter to a smaller size immediately adjacent to the head. The main function of the
neck is to transmit rotational and translational forces to
the head. At the same time, it is desirable for the operator to have the greatest possible visibility of the cutting head and the greatest manipulative freedom. For
this reason the neck dimensions represent a compromise between the need for a large cross-section to provide strength and a small cross-section to improve access and visibility.
Head Design. The head is the working part of the instrument, the cutting edges or points that perform the
desired shaping of tooth structure. The shape of the head
and the material used to construct it are closely related to
its intended application and technique of use. The heads
of instruments show greater variation in design and construction than either of the other main portions. For this
reason the characteristics of the head form the basis on
which rotary instruments are usually classified.
Many characteristics of the heads of rotary instruments could be used for classification. Most important
among these is the division into bladed instruments and
abrasive instruments. Material of construction, head
size, and head shape are additional characteristics that
are useful for further subdivision. Bladed and abrasive
instruments exhibit substantially different clinical performances, even when operated under nearly identical
conditions. This appears to result from differences in the
mechanism of cutting that are inherent in their design.

DENTAL BURS
The term bur is applied to all rotary cutting instruments
that have bladed cutting heads. This includes instruments
intended for such purposes as finishing metal restorations and surgical removal of bone, as well as those primarily intended for tooth preparation.
Historical Development of Dental Burs. The earliest
burs, like those shown in Fig. 7-20, were handmade.
Thus, they were both expensive and variable in dimension and performance. The shapes, dimensions, and nomenclature of modern burs are directly related to those of
the first machine-made burs introduced in 1891. 35 Early
burs were made of steel. Steel burs perform well, cutting
human dentin at low speeds, but dull rapidly at higher
speeds or when cutting enamel. Once dulled, the reduced
cutting effectiveness creates increased heat and vibration.
Carbide burs, which were introduced in 1947, have
largely replaced steel burs for tooth preparation. Steel
burs now are used mainly for finishing procedures. Carbide burs perform better than steel burs at all speeds,
and their superiority is greatest at high speeds.
All carbide burs have heads of cemented carbide in
which microscopic carbide particles, usually tungsten
carbide, are held together in a matrix of cobalt or nickel.
Carbide is much harder than steel and less subject to
dulling during cutting.
In most burs, the carbide head is attached to a steel
shank and neck by welding or brazing. The substitution
of steel for carbide in those portions of the bur where
greater wear resistance is not required has several advantages. It permits the manufacturer more freedom of
design in attaining the characteristics desired in the instrument and at the same time allows economy in the
cost of materials of construction.
Although most carbide burs have the joint located in
the posterior part of the head, others are sold that have
the joint located within the shank and therefore have
carbide necks as well as heads. Carbide is stiffer and
stronger than steel, but it is also more brittle. A carbide
neck subjected to a sudden blow or shock will fracture,
whereas a steel neck will bend. A bur that is even slightly
bent produces increased vibration and overcutting as a
result of increased run-out. Thus, although steel necks reduce the risk of fracture during use, if bent they may
cause severe problems. Either type can be satisfactory,
and other design factors are varied to take maximal advantage of the properties of the material used.
Bur Classification Systems. To facilitate the description, selection, and manufacture of burs, it is highly desirable to have some agreed-upon shorthand designation, which represents all variables of a particular head
design by some simple code. In the United States, dental burs traditionally have been described in terms of an
arbitrary numerical code for head size and shape (e.g.,
2 = 1-mm diameter round bur; 57 = 1-mm diameter
straight fissure bur; 34 = 0.8-mm diameter inverted
cone bur) .2 Despite the complexity of the system, it is

CHAPTER

7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

still in common use. Other countries developed and
used similarly arbitrary systems. Newer classification
systems such as those developed by the International
Dental Federation (Federation Dentaire Internationale
[FDI]) and International Standards Organization (ISO)
tend to use separate designations for shape (usually a
shape name) and size (usually a number giving the
head diameter in tenths of a millimeter [e.g., round 010;
straight fissure plain 010; inverted cone 008]). 19
Shapes. The term bur shape refers to the contour or
silhouette of the head. The basic head shapes are round,
inverted cone, pear, straight fissure, and tapered fissure
(Fig. 7-34).
A round bur is spherical. This shape customarily has
been used for such purposes as initial entry into the
tooth, extension of the preparation, preparation of retention features, and caries removal.
An inverted cone bur is a portion of a rather rapidly tapered cone with the apex of the cone directed toward
the bur shank. Head length is approximately the same
as the diameter. This shape is particularly suitable for
providing undercuts in tooth preparations.
A pear-shaped bur is a portion of a slightly tapered
cone with the small end of the cone directed toward the
bur shank. The end of the head either is continuously
curved or is flat with rounded corners where the sides
and flat end intersect. A normal-length pear bur (length
slightly greater than the width) is advocated for use in
Class I tooth preparations for gold foil. A long-length
pear bur (length three times the width) is advocated for
tooth preparations for amalgam.
A straight fissure bur is an elongated cylinder. Some
advocate this shape for amalgam tooth preparation.
Modified burs of this design with slightly curved tip angles are available.
A tapered fissure bur is a portion of a slightly tapered
cone with the small end of the cone directed away from

FIG 7-34

the bur shank. This shape is used for tooth preparations
for indirect restorations, for which freedom from undercuts is essential for successful withdrawal of patterns
and final seating of the restorations. Tapered fissure
burs can have a flat end with the tip corners slightly
rounded.
Among these basic shapes, variations are possible.
Fissure and inverted cone burs may have half-round or
domed ends. Taper and cone angles may be varied. The
ratio of head length to diameter may be varied. In addition to shape, other features may be varied such as the
number of blades, spiral versus axial patterns for blades,
and continuous versus crosscut blade edges.
Sizes. In the United States, the number designating
bur size also has traditionally served as a code for head
design. This numbering system for burs was originated
by the S.S. White Dental Manufacturing Company in
1891 for their first machine-made burs. It was both extensive and logical, so that other domestic manufacturers found it convenient to adopt it for their burs, as
well. As a result, for over 60 years there was a general
uniformity for bur numbers in the United States. Table
7-4 shows the correlation of bur head sizes with dimensions and shapes. It includes not only many bur
sizes still in common use, but also others that have become obsolete.
The original numbering system grouped burs by 9
shapes and 11 sizes. The '/Z and 1/4 designations were
added later when smaller instruments were included in
the system. All original bur designs had continuous
blade edges. Later, when crosscut burs were found to be
more effective for cutting dentin at low speeds, crosscut
versions of many bur sizes were introduced. This modification was indicated by adding 500 to the number of
the equivalent noncrosscut size. Thus, a No. 57 with
crosscut was designated No. 557. Similarly, a 900 prefix
was used to indicate a head design intended for end-

Basic bur head shapes.

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

cutting only. Except for differences in blade design, a
No. 957, No. 557, and No. 57 bur all had the same head
dimensions. These changes occurred gradually over
time without disrupting the system. The sizes in common use in 1955 are shown in Table 7-5. The system
changed rapidly thereafter, but where the numbers are
still used, the designs and dimensions remain the same.
Modifications in Bur Design. As available handpiece speeds increased after 1950, particularly after the
high-speed turbine handpieces were introduced, a new
cycle of modification of bur sizes and shapes occurred.
Numerous other categories have arisen as new variations in blade number or design have been created. Some
of the numbers assigned to those burs were selected ar-

bitrarily. With the introduction of new bur sizes and
elimination of older sizes, much of the logic in the system has no longer been maintained, and many dentists
and manufacturers no longer recognize the original significance of the numbers used for burs. The number of
standard sizes that have continued in use has been reduced. This has been most obvious in the decreased
popularity of large-diameter burs. The cutting effectiveness of carbide burs is greatly increased at high speeds.'
This is particularly true of the small-diameter sizes,
which did not have sufficient peripheral speed for efficient cutting when used at lower rates of rotation. As
the effectiveness of small burs has increased, they have replaced larger burs in many procedures. Three other major

Original Bur Head Sizes (1891 to 1954)

Courtesy of H.M. Moylan, S. S. White Dental Manufacturing Company.
*Millimeter values rounded to the nearest 0.1 mm.

Standard Bur Head Sizes-Carbide and Steel (1955 to Present)

Nonstandard excavating and finishing burs are not shown in this table.
*Millimeter values rounded to the nearest 0.1 mm.

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

trends in bur design are discernible: reduced use of cross-

cuts, extended heads on fissure burs, and rounding of
sharp tip angles.
Crosscuts are needed on fissure burs to obtain adequate cutting effectiveness at low speeds, but at high
speeds they are not needed. Because crosscut burs used
at high speeds tend to produce unduly rough surfaces,
many of the crosscut sizes originally developed for lowspeed use have been replaced by noncrosscut instruments of the same dimension for high-speed use. In
many instances, the noncrosscut equivalents were available, thus a No. 57 bur might be used at high speed,
whereas a No. 557 bur was preferred for low-speed use.
Noncrosscut versions of the 700 series burs have become popular, but their introduction precipitated a crisis in the bur numbering system because no number
had traditionally been assigned to burs of this type.
Carbide fissure burs with extended head lengths two to
three times those of the normal tapered fissure burs of
similar diameter have been introduced. Such a design
would never have been practical using a brittle material
such as carbide if the bur were to be used at low speed.
The applied force required to make a bur cut at speeds
of 5000 to 6000 rpm would normally be sufficient to
fracture such an attenuated head. The extremely light

applied pressures needed for cutting at high speed, however, permit many modifications of burs that would
have been impractical at low speed.
The third major trend in bur design has been toward
rounding of the sharp tip corners. Early contributions to
this trend were made by Markley and Sockwell. 34 Because teeth are relatively brittle, the sharp angles produced by conventional burs can result in high stress
concentrations and increase the tendency of the tooth to
fracture. Bur heads with rounded corners result in lower
stresses in restored teeth, enhance the strength of the
tooth by preserving vital dentin, and facilitate the adaptation of restorative materials. Both carbide burs and diamond instruments of these designs last longer because
there are no sharp corners to chip and wear. Such burs
facilitate tooth preparation with desired features of a
flat preparation floor and rounded internal line angles.
Many of these new and modified bur designs simplify the techniques and reduce the effort needed for optimal results. Although the development of new bur
sizes and shapes has greatly increased the number of
different types in current use, the number actually required for clinical effectiveness has been reduced. Most
instruments recommended in this text for the preparation of teeth are illustrated in Fig. 7-35. The selection in-

FIG. 7-35 Burs used in recommended
procedures. Bur sizes '/„ '/2 , 2, 4, 33 1/2 ,
and 169L are standard carbide burs
available from various sources. The
245, 271, and 272 burs are nonstandard
carbide burs that do not conform to the
current ADA standard numbering system. They are designed to combine
rounded corners with flat ends and are
available from several manufacturers.
The diamond instruments shown are
wheel (Star No. 110) (x), flame (Star
No. 265-8F) (y), and tapered cylinder (R
& R No. 770 x 7) (z). Two sizes of twist
drill are illustrated. Particular drills often are provided as specified by manufacturers of pin-retention systems.

CHAPTER7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

Names and Key Dimensions of Recommended Burs

*Similar to the No. 33% bur except that it is safe-sided end-cutting only.
Similar to the No. 169 bur except for greater head length.
These burs differ from the equivalent ADA size by being flat ended with rounded corners. The manufacturer's number has been changed to indicate this difference.
§Similar to the No. 330 bur except for greater head length.

eludes standard head designs and modified designs of
the types just discussed. Table 7-6 lists the significant
head dimensions of these standard and modified burs.
A long-standing international problem related to the
dimensions and designations of rotary dental instruments arose because each country developed its own
system of classification. Dentists in the United States
were not often aware of the problem because they predominantly used domestic products, and all U.S. manufacturers used the same system. The rapid rate at which
new bur designs were introduced during the transition
to high-speed techniques threatened to cause a complete breakdown in the numbering system. As different
manufacturers developed and marketed new burs of
similar design almost simultaneously, there was an increased risk of similar burs being given either different
numbers or different burs the same number. Combined
with an increased use of foreign products in the United
States this has led to an increased interest in the establishment of international standards for dimensions,
nomenclature, and other characteristics.
In recent years, progress toward the development of
an international numbering system for basic bur shapes
and sizes under the auspices of the International Standards Organization (ISO) has been slow. For other design features the trend instead appears to be toward the
use of individual manufacturer's code numbers. Therefore, throughout the remaining text, the traditional U.S.
numbers are used, where possible. The few exceptions
are shown in Fig. 7-35 and Table 7-6.
Additional Features in Head Design. A large number of factors other than head size and shape are in-

volved in determining the clinical effectiveness of a bur
design."" Fig. 7-36 shows a lateral view and a crosssectional view of a No. 701 crosscut tapered fissure bur
in which several of these factors are illustrated. The lateral view (see Fig. 7-36, A) demonstrates neck diameter,
head diameter, head length, taper angle, blade spiral angle, and crosscut size and spacing as they apply to this
bur size. Of these features head length and taper angle are
primarily descriptive and may be varied within limits
consistent with the intended use of the bur. This bur
was originally designed for use at low speeds in preparing teeth for cast restorations. The taper angle therefore
is intended to approximate the desired occlusal divergence of the lateral walls of the preparations, and the
head length must be long enough to reach the full depth
of the normal preparation. These factors do not otherwise affect the performance of the bur.
Neck diameter is important functionally because a neck
that is too small will result in a weak instrument unable
to resist lateral forces. Too large a neck diameter may interfere with visibility and the use of the part of the bur
head next to the neck and may restrict access for coolants. As the head of a bur increases in length or diameter, the moment arm exerted by lateral forces increases,
and the neck needs to be larger.
In comparison with these factors, two other design
variables, the spiral angle and crosscutting, have considerably greater influence on bur performance. There is a
tendency toward reduced spiral angles on burs intended
exclusively for high-speed operation where a large spiral
is not needed to produce a smoother preparation and a
smaller angle, which produces more efficient cutting.

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

7-36 Design features of bur heads (illustrated using
No. 701 bur). A, Lateral view: neck diameter (v), head
length (w), taper angle (x), and spiral angle (y). B, End
view: head diameter (z).

FIG

As noted previously, crosscut bur designs have notches
in the blade edges to increase cutting effectiveness at low
and medium speeds. A certain amount of perpendicular
force is required to make a blade grasp the surface and
start cutting as it passes across the surface. The harder
the surface, the duller is the blade, and the greater its
length, the more force that is required to initiate cutting.
By reducing the total length of bur blade that is actively
cutting at any one time, the crosscuts effectively increase
both the cutting pressure resulting from rotation of the
bur and the perpendicular pressure holding the blade
edge against the tooth.
As each crosscut blade cuts, it leaves small ridges of
tooth structure standing behind the notches. Because the
notches in two succeeding blades do not line up with
each other, the ridges left by one blade are removed by
the following one at low or medium speeds. However, at
the high speed attained with air-turbine handpieces, the
contact of the bur with the tooth is not continuous, and
usually only one blade cuts effectively. '6 Under these circumstances, although the high cutting rate of crosscut
burs is maintained, the ridges are not removed and a
much rougher cut surface results . 8
A cross-sectional view of the same No. 701 bur is
shown in Fig. 7-36, B. This cross-section is made at the
point of largest head diameter and is drawn as seen
from the shank end. The bur has six blades uniformly
spaced with depressed areas between them. These depressed areas are properly known as the flutes. The number of blades on a bur is always even because even num-

bers are easier to produce in the manufacturing process,
and instruments with odd numbers of blades cut no better than those with even numbers. The number of
blades on an excavating bur may vary from 6 to 8 to 10.
Burs intended mainly for finishing procedures usually
have 12 to 40 blades. The greater are the number of
blades, the smoother is the cutting action at low speeds.
Most burs are made with at least six blades because they
may need to be used in this speed range. In the highspeed range, it appears that no more than one blade cuts
effectively at any one time, and the remaining blades
are, in effect, spares. The tendency for the bur to cut on
a single blade is often a result of factors other than the
bur itself. Nevertheless, it is important that the bur head
be as symmetric as possible. Two terms are in common
use to measure this characteristic of bur heads: concentricity and runout.
Concentricity is a direct measurement of the symmetry
of the bur head itself. It measures how closely a single
circle can be passed through the tips of all of the blades.
Thus, concentricity is an indication of whether one blade
is longer or shorter than the others. It is a static measurement not directly related to function. Runout, on the
other hand, is a dynamic test measuring the accuracy
with which all blade tips pass through a single point
when the instrument is rotated. It measures not only the
concentricity of the head, but also the accuracy with
which the center of rotation passes through the center of
the head. Even a perfectly concentric head will exhibit
substantial runout if the head i s off center on the axis of

CHAPTER

7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

the bur, the bur neck is bent, the bur is not held straight
in the handpiece chuck, or the chuck is eccentric relative
to the handpiece bearings. The runout can never be less
than the concentricity, and it is usually substantially
greater. The runout is the more significant term clinically,
because it is the primary cause of vibration during cutting and is the factor that determines the minimum diameter of the hole that can be prepared by a given bur. It
is because of runout errors that burs normally cut holes
measurably larger than the head diameter.
Bur Blade Design. The actual cutting action of a bur
(or a diamond) takes place in a very small region at the
edge of the blade (or at the point of a diamond chip). In
the high-speed range, this effective portion of the individual blade is limited to no more than a few thousandths
of a centimeter adjacent to the blade edge. Fig. 7-37 is an
enlarged schematic view of this portion of a bur blade.
Several terms used in the discussion of blade design are
illustrated.
Each blade has two sides, the rake face (toward the direction of cutting) and clearance face, and three important
angles, the rake angle, the edge angle, and the clearance angle. The optimal angles are dependent on such factors as
the mechanical properties of the blade material, the mechanical properties of the material being cut, the rotational speed and diameter of the bur, and the lateral
force applied by the operator to the handpiece, and thus
to the bur.
The rake angle is the most important design characteristic
of a bur blade. For cutting hard, brittle materials, a nega-

tive rake angle minimizes fractures of the cutting edge,
thereby increasing the tool life. A rake angle is said to
be negative when the rake face is ahead of the radius
(from cutting edge to axis of bur) as is illustrated in Fig.
7-37. Increasing the edge angle reinforces the cutting
edge and reduces the likelihood for the edge of the
blade to fracture. Carbide bur blades have higher hard-

FIG. 7-37 Bur blade design. Schematic cross-section
viewed from shank end of head to show rake angle,
edge angle, and clearance angle.

ness and are more wear resistant, but they are more brittle than steel blades and require greater edge angles to
minimize fractures. The three angles cannot be varied
independently of each other. An increase in the clearance angle, for example, causes a decrease in the edge
angle. The clearance angle eliminates rubbing friction of
the clearance face, provides a stop to prevent the bur
edge from digging into the tooth structure excessively,
and reduces the radius of the blade back of the cutting
edge to provide adequate flute space or clearance space
for the chips formed ahead of the following blade.
Carbide burs normally have blades with slight negative rake angles and edge angles of approximately 90
degrees. Their clearance faces either are curved or have
two surfaces to provide a low clearance angle near the
edge and a greater clearance space ahead of the following blade.

DIAMOND ABRASIVE INSTRUMENTS
The second major category of rotary dental cutting instruments involves abrasive rather than blade cutting.
Abrasive instruments are based on small, angular particles of a hard substance held in a matrix of softer material. Cutting occurs at a large number of points where
individual hard particles protrude from the matrix,
rather than along a continuous blade edge. This difference in design causes definite differences in the mechanisms by which the two types of instruments cut and in
the applications for which they are best suited.
Abrasive instruments are generally grouped as diamond or other instruments. Diamond instruments have
had great clinical impact because of their long life and
great effectiveness in cutting enamel and dentin. Diamond instruments for dental use were introduced in the
United States in 1942 at a time before carbide burs were
available, and at a time when interest in increased rotational speeds was beginning to expose the limitations of

CHAPTER

7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

steel burs. The earliest diamond instruments were substitutes for previously used abrasive points of other types
used for grinding and finishing. Their vastly superior
performance in these applications led to their immediate
acceptance. The shortage of burs as a result of wartime
demands emphasized the relative durability of diamond
instruments for cutting enamel and promoted the development of operative techniques employing them.
Terminology. Diamond instruments consist of three
parts: a metal blank, the powdered diamond abrasive,
and a metallic bonding material that holds the diamond
powder onto the blank (Fig. 7-38). 3 ° The blank in many

FIG . 7-38

Diamond instrument construction: A, overall view;
B, detail of abrasive layer; and C, detail of particle bonding.

ways resembles a bur without blades. It has the same essential parts: head, neck, and shank.
The shank dimensions, like those for bur shanks, depend on the intended handpiece. The neck is normally a
tapered section of reduced diameter that connects the
shank to the head, but for large disc or wheel-shaped instruments it may not be reduced below the shank diameter. The head of the blank is undersized in comparison
with the desired final dimensions of the instrument, but
its size and shape determine the size and shape of the
finished instrument. Dimensions of the head make allowance for a fairly uniform thickness of diamonds and
bonding material on all sides. Some abrasive instruments are designed as a mandrel and a detachable head.
This is much more practical for abrasive disks that have
very short lifetimes.
The diamonds employed are industrial diamonds, either natural or synthetic, that have been crushed to
powder and then carefully graded for size and quality.
The shape of the individual particle is important because of its effect on the cutting efficiency and durability of the instrument, but the careful control of particle
size is probably of greater importance. The diamonds
generally are attached to the blank by electroplating a
layer of metal on the blank while holding the diamonds in place against it. While the electroplating
holds the diamonds in place, it also tends to cover
much of the diamond surfaces. Some proprietary techniques do allow greater diamond exposure and more
effective cutting.
Classification. Diamond instruments are currently
marketed in a profusion of head shapes and sizes (Table
7-7), and in all of the standard shank designs. Most of the
diamond shapes parallel those for burs (Fig. 7-39). This

Standard Categories of Shapes and Sizes for Diamond Cutting Instruments

"See Fig. 7-39 for examples of head shapes.
**Most heads and shanks come in a range of dimensions.

CHAPTER

FIG . 7-39

7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

Characteristic shapes and designs for a range of diamond cutting instruments.

great diversity arose, in part, as a result of the relative
simplicity of the manufacturing process. Because it is
possible to make diamond instruments in almost any
shape for which a blank can be manufactured, they are
produced in many highly specialized shapes, on which it
would be impractical to place cutting blades. This has
been a major factor in establishing clinical uses for these
points, which are not in direct competition with burs.
Head Shapes and Sizes. Diamond instruments are
available in a wide variety of shapes and in sizes that
correspond to all except the smallest diameter burs. The
greatest difference lies in the diversity of other sizes
and shapes in which diamond instruments are produced. Even with many subdivisions, the size range
within each group is very large in comparison with that
found among the burs. More than 200 shapes and sizes
of diamonds are currently marketed.
Because of their design with an abrasive layer over an
underlying blank, the smallest diamond instruments
cannot be as small in diameter as the smallest burs, but
a wide range of sizes is available for each shape. No one
manufacturer produces all sizes, but each will usually
offer an assortment of instruments, including the popular sizes and shapes. Because of the lack of uniform
nomenclature for diamond instruments, it is often necessary to select them by inspection to obtain the desired
size and shape. It is essential, therefore, to indicate the
manufacturer when attempting to describe diamond instruments by catalogue number.
Diamond Particle Factors. The clinical performance
of diamond abrasive instruments depends on the size,
spacing, uniformity, exposure, and bonding of the diamond
particles. Increased pressure causes the particles to dig
into the surface more deeply, leaving deeper scratches
and removing more tooth structure.

Diamond particle size is commonly categorized as
coarse (125 to 150 um), medium (88 to 125 um), fine (60
to 74 um), and very fine (38 to 44 um) for diamond
preparation instruments . 30 These ranges correspond to
standard sieve sizes for separating particle sizes. When
using large particle sizes, the number of abrasive particles that can be placed on a given area of the head is decreased. Thus, for any given force that the operator applies, the pressure on each particle tip is greater. The
resulting pressure also is increased if diamond particles
are more widely spaced so that fewer are in contact with
the surface at any one time. The final clinical performance of diamond instruments is strongly affected by
the technique used to take advantage of the design factors for each instrument.
Diamond finishing instruments use even finer diamonds (10 to 38 um) to produce relatively smooth surfaces for final finishing with diamond polishing pastes.
Surface finishes of less than 1 um are considered clinically smooth (see Composites in Chapter 4) and can be
routinely attained by using a series of finer and finer
polishing steps.
Proper diamond instrument speed and pressure are
the major factors in determining service life." Properly
used diamond instruments will last almost indefinitely.
Almost the only cause of failure of diamond instruments
is loss of the diamonds from critical areas. This results
from the use of excess pressure in an attempt to increase
the cutting rate at inadequate speeds.

OTHER ABRASIVE INSTRUMENTS
Many types of abrasive instruments are used in dentistry in addition to diamond instruments. They were at
one time extensively used for tooth preparation, but
their use is now primarily restricted to shaping, finish-

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

ing, and polishing restorations, both in the clinic and in
the laboratory.
Classification. In these instruments, as in the diamond instruments, the cutting surfaces of the head are
composed of abrasive particles held in a continuous matrix of softer material. Other than this and their use of
standard shank designs, diamond instruments have little similarity in their construction. They may be divided
into two distinct groups, molded instruments and coated
instruments. Each uses various abrasives and matrix
materials.
Molded abrasive instruments have heads that are manufactured by molding or pressing a uniform mixture of
abrasive and matrix around the roughened end of the
shank, or cementing a premolded head to the shank. In
contrast to diamond instruments, molded instruments
have a much softer matrix and wear during use. The
abrasive is distributed throughout the matrix so new
particles are exposed by the wear. These instruments are
made in a full range of shapes and sizes. The mounted
heads are often termed points as well as stones. Hard and
rigid molded instrument heads use rigid polymer or ceramic materials for their matrix and commonly are used
for grinding and shaping procedures. Other molded instrument heads use flexible matrix materials, such as
rubber, to hold the abrasive particles. These are used
predominantly for finishing and polishing procedures.
Molded unmounted discs or wheelstones are made that attach by a screw to a mandrel of suitable size for a given
handpiece that has a threaded hole in the end. This design permits the instruments to be changed easily and
discarded economically.
The coated abrasive instruments are mostly discs that
have a thin layer of abrasive cemented to a flexible backing. This construction allows the instrument to conform
to the surface contour of a tooth or restoration. Most
flexible discs are designed for reversible attachment to a
mandrel. Coated abrasive instruments may be used in
the finishing/ smoothing procedures of certain enamel
walls (and margins) of tooth preparations for indirect
restorations, but most often in finishing procedures for
restorations.
The abrasives are softer and less wear-resistant than
diamond powder and, as a result, tend to lose their
sharp edges and thus their cutting efficiency with use.
When this happens to coated instruments, they are discarded. Molded instruments, in contrast, are intended
to be partially regenerating by gradual loss of their
worn outer layers, but may require that the operator reshape them to improve their concentricity. This is accomplished by applying a truing or shaping stone
against the rotating instrument.
Materials. The matrix materials usually are phenolic
resins or rubber. Some molded points may be sintered,
but most are resin bonded. A rubber matrix is used primarily to obtain a flexible head on instruments to be

Hardness Values of Restorative
Materials, Tooth Structure,
and Abrasives

used for polishing. A harder, nonflexible rubber matrix is
often used for molded SiC discs. The matrix of coated
instruments is usually one of the phenolic resins.
Synthetic or natural abrasives may be used, including
SiC, aluminum oxide, garnet, quartz, pumice, and cuttlebone. The hardness of the abrasive has a major effect
on the cutting efficiency. Mohs hardnesses for important
dental abrasives are shown in Table 7-8.
Silicon carbide (Carborundum) usually is used in molded
rounds, tree or bud shapes, wheels, and cylinders of various sizes. These points are normally gray-green, available in various textures, usually fast cutting (except on
enamel), and they produce a moderately smooth surface.
Molded unmounted discs are black or a dark color,
have a soft matrix, wear more rapidly than stones, and
produce a moderately rough surface texture. These discs
are termed Carborundum discs or separating discs.
Aluminum oxide is used for the same instrument designs as SiC. Points are usually white, rigid, fine textured,
less porous, and produce a smoother surface than SiC.
Garnet (reddish) and quartz (white) are used for
coated discs that are available in a series of particle sizes
that ranges from coarse to medium-fine for use in initial
finishing. These abrasives are hard enough to cut tooth
structure and all restorative materials, with the exception of some porcelains.
Pumice is a powdered abrasive produced by crushing
foamed volcanic glass into thin glass flakes. The flakes
cut effectively, but break down rapidly. Pumice is used
in rubber discs and wheels, usually for initial polishing
procedures.

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

Cuttlebone is derived from the cuttlefish, a relative of
squid and octopus. It is becoming scarce and is gradually being replaced by synthetic substitutes. It is a soft
white abrasive, used only in coated discs for final finishing and polishing. It is soft enough that it reduces the
risk of unintentional damage to tooth structure during
the final stages of finishing.

CUTTING MECHANISMS
For cutting, it is necessary to apply sufficient pressure to
make the cutting edge of a blade or abrasive particle dig
into the surface. Local fracture occurs more easily if the
strain rate is high (high rotary instrument surface
speed) because the surface being cut responds in a brittle fashion.
The process by which rotary instruments cut tooth
structure is complex and not fully understood. The following discussion of cutting addresses cutting evaluations, cutting instrument design, proposed cutting mechanisms, and clinical recommendations for cutting.
EVALUATION OF CUTTING
Cutting can be measured in terms of both effectiveness
and efficiency. Certain factors may influence one, but
not the other .21 Cutting effectiveness is the rate of tooth
structure removal (mm/min or mg/sec). Effectiveness
does not consider potential side effects such as heat or
noise. Cutting efficiency is the percentage of energy actually producing cutting. Cutting efficiency is reduced
when energy is wasted as heat or noise. It is possible to
increase effectiveness while decreasing efficiency. A dull
bur, for example, may be made to cut faster than a sharp
bur by applying a greater pressure, but experience indicates that this results in a great increase in heat production, and thus reduced efficiency
There is general agreement that increased rotational
speed results in increased effectiveness and efficiency.
Adverse effects associated with increased speeds are heat,
vibration, and noise. Heat has been identified as a primary
cause of pulpal injury. Air-water sprays do not prevent the
production of heat, but do serve to remove it before it
causes a damaging rise in temperature within the tooth.
BLADED CUTTING
The following discussion focuses on rotary bladed instruments, but is applicable to bladed hand instruments
as well. Tooth structure, like other materials, undergoes
both brittle and ductile fracture. Brittle fracture is associated with crack production, usually by tensile loading.
Ductile fracture involves plastic deformation of material,
usually proceeding by shear. Extensive plastic deformation also may produce local work hardening and encourage brittle fracture as well. Low-speed cutting tends
to proceed by plastic deformation before tooth structure
fracture. High-speed cutting, especially of enamel, proceeds by brittle fracture.

The rate of stress application (or strain rate) affects the
resultant properties of materials. In general, the faster
the rate of loading, the greater will be the strength,
hardness, modulus of elasticity, and brittleness of a material. A cutting instrument with a large diameter and
high rotational speed produces a high surface speed,
and thus a high stress (or strain) rate.
Many factors interact to determine which cutting
mechanism is active in a particular situation. The mechanical properties of tooth structure, the design of the
cutting edge or point, the linear speed of the instrument's surface, the contact force applied, and the power
output characteristics of the handpiece influence the
cutting process in various ways. 9
In order for the blade to initiate the cutting action, it
must be sharp, must have a higher hardness and modulus of elasticity than the material being cut, and must be
pressed against the surface with sufficient force. The
high hardness and modulus of elasticity are essential to
concentrate the applied force on a small enough area to
exceed the shear strength of the material being cut.
As shown in Fig. 7-40, sheared segments accumulate
in a distorted layer that slides up along the rake face of
the blade until it breaks or until the blade disengages
from the surface as it rotates. These chips will accumulate in the clearance space between blades until washed
out or thrown out by centrifugal force.
Mechanical distortion of tooth structure ahead of the
blade produces heat. Frictional heat is produced by both
the rubbing action of the cut chips against the rake face
of the blade and the blade tip against the cut surface of
the tooth immediately behind the edge.
This can produce extreme temperature increases in
both the tooth and the bur in the absence of adequate
cooling. The transfer of heat is not instantaneous, and
the reduced temperature rise observed in teeth cut at
very high speeds may, in part, be caused by removal of
the heated surface layer of tooth structure by a following blade before the heat can be conducted into the
tooth.

FIG . 7-40 Schematic representation of bur blade (end view)
cutting a ductile material by shearing mechanism. Energy is
required to deform the material removed and produce new
surface.

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

ABRASIVE CUTTING
The following discussion is pertinent to all abrasive cutting situations, but diamond instruments are used as the
primary example. 13 The cutting action of diamond abrasive instruments is similar in many ways to that of
bladed instruments, but key differences result from the
properties, size, and distribution of the abrasive. The
very high hardness of diamonds provides superior resistance to wear. A diamond instrument that is not
abused, has little or no tendency to dull with use. Individual diamond particles have very sharp edges, are
randomly oriented on the surface, and tend to have
large negative rake angles.
When diamond instruments are used to cut ductile
materials, some material will be removed as chips, but
much material will flow laterally around the cutting
point and be left as a ridge of deformed material on the
surface (Fig. 7-41). Repeated deformation work hardens
the distorted material until irregular portions become
brittle, break off, and are removed. This type of cutting
is less efficient than that of a blade; therefore burs are
generally preferred for cutting ductile materials such as
dentin.

Diamonds cut brittle materials by a different mechanism. Most cutting results from tensile fractures that produce a series of subsurface cracks (Fig. 7-42). Diamonds
are most efficient when used to cut brittle materials, and
are superior to burs for the removal of dental enamel.
Because a diamond prepares a rougher tooth surface, diamonds may be preferred for use in tooth preparation
for bonded restorations. The roughened prepared surface increases the surface area, and therefore, the bonding potential.
Diamond abrasives are commonly used for milling in
CAD/CAM or copy-milling applications (see Machined
Restorations in Chapter 4).

CUTTING RECOMMENDATIONS
Overall, the requirements for effective and efficient
cutting include using a contra-angle handpiece, airwater spray for cooling, high operating speed (above
200,000 rpm), light pressure, and a carbide bur or
diamond instrument. Carbide burs are better for endcutting, produce lower heat, and have more blade edges per
diameter for cutting. They are effectively used for
punch cuts to enter tooth structure, intracoronal tooth

FIG . 7-41 Schematic representation of an abrasive particle cutting ductile material. A, Lateral
view. B, Cross-sectional view. Material is displaced laterally by passage of an abrasive particle,
work hardened, and subsequently removed by other particles.

FIG. 7-42 Schematic representation of abrasive particle cutting brittle material. A, Lateral view.
B, Cross-sectional view. Subsurface cracks caused by the passage of abrasive particles intersect, undermining small pieces of material, which are then easily removed by following abrasive particles.

CHAPTER)

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

preparation, amalgam removal, small preparations,
and secondary retention features. Diamond instruments have higher hardness, and coarse diamonds
have very high cutting effectiveness. Diamonds are

more effective than burs for both intracoronal and extracoronal tooth preparations, beveling enamel margins on
tooth preparations, and enameloplasty.

HAZARDS WITH
CUTTING INSTRUMENTS
Almost everything done in a dental office involves some
risk to the patient, dentist, and/or auxiliaries. For the
patient, there are pulpal dangers from the tooth preparation and restoration procedures. There are also soft tissue
dangers. Everyone is potentially susceptible to eye, ear, and
inhalation dangers. However, careful adherence to normal precautions can eliminate or minimize most risks
associated with cutting instrument use.

PULPAL PRECAUTIONS
The use of cutting instruments can harm the pulp by exposure to mechanical vibration, heat generation, desiccation and loss of dentinal tubule fluid, and/or transection of odontoblastic processes. As the thickness of
remaining dentin decreases, the pulpal insult (and response) from heat or desiccation increases. Slight to
moderate injury produces a localized, protective pulpal
response in the region of the cut tubules. In severe inj ury, destruction extends beyond the cut tubules, often
resulting in pulpal abscess and death of the pulp. These
pulpal sequelae (recovery or necrosis) take from 2 weeks
to 6 months or longer, depending on the extent and degree of the trauma. Although a young pulp is more
prone to injury, it also recovers more effectively when
compared with an older pulp, in which the recuperative
powers are slower and less effective.
Enamel and dentin are good thermal insulators and
will protect the pulp if the quantity of heat is not too
great and the remaining thickness of tissue is adequate.
The longer the time of cutting and the higher the local
temperature produced, the greater is the threat of thermal trauma. The remaining tissue is effective in protecting the

pulp in proportion to the square of its thickness. Steel burs
produce more heat than carbide burs because of inefficient cutting. Burs and diamond instruments that are
dull or plugged with debris do not cut efficiently, resulting in heat production. When used without coolants, diamond instruments generate more damaging
heat than carbide burs.
The most common instrument coolants are air or air-

water spray. Air alone as a coolant is not effective in preventing pulpal damage because it needlessly desiccates
the dentin and damages the odontoblasts (see Chapter 2). Air has a much lower heat capacity than water
and is much less efficient in absorbing unwanted heat.
An air coolant alone should be used only when visibil-

ity is a problem, such as during the finishing procedures
of tooth preparations. At such times, air coolant combined with both lower speed and light intermittent application, should be used to enhance vision and minimize trauma. Air-water spray is universally used to cool,
moisten, and clear the operating site during normal cutting procedures. In addition, the spray lubricates, cleans,
and cools the cutting instrument, thereby increasing its
efficiency and service life. A well-designed and properly directed air-water spray also helps keep the gingival
crevice open for better vision when gingival extension is
necessary. The use of a water spray and its removal by
an effective high-volume evacuator are especially important when old amalgam restorations are removed
because they decrease mercury vapor release and increase visibility.
During normal cutting procedures a layer of debris,
described as a smear layer, is created that covers the cut
surfaces of the enamel and dentin (see Chapters 2 and
6). The smear layer on dentin is moderately protective
because it occludes dentinal tubules and inhibits the
outward flow of tubular fluid and the inward penetration of microleakage contaminants. However, the smear
layer is still porous. When air alone is applied to dentin,
local desiccation may produce fluid flow and affect the
physiologic status of the odontoblastic processes in the
underlying dentin (review Chapter 2 for hydrodynamic
sequelae). Air is applied only to the extent of removing ex-

cess moisture, leaving a glistening surface.

SOFT TISSUE PRECAUTIONS
The lips, tongue, and cheeks of the patient are the most
frequent areas of soft tissue injury. The handpiece should
never be operated unless there is good access and vision
to the cutting site. A rubber dam is very helpful in isolating the operating site. When the dam is not used, the
dental assistant can retract the soft tissue on one side
with a mouth mirror, cotton roll, and/or evacuator tip.
The dentist can usually manage the other side with a
mirror and/or cotton roll. If the dentist must work
alone, the patient can help by holding a retraction-type
saliva ejector evacuator tip, after it is positioned in the
mouth.
With air-turbine handpieces, the rotating instrument
does not stop immediately when the foot control is released. The operator must either wait for the instrument
to stop or be extremely careful when removing the
handpiece from the mouth so as not to lacerate soft tissues. The large disc is one of the most dangerous instruments used in the mouth. Fortunately such discs are seldom indicated intraorally. They should be used with
light, intermittent application and with extreme caution.
The dentist and the assistant must always be aware of
the patient's response during the cutting procedures. A
sudden reflex movement by the patient, such as gagging, swallowing, or coughing could result in serious

C H A PT E R 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

injury. If an accident does occur in which soft tissue is
damaged, the operator should remain calm and control
any hemorrhage with a pressure pack. The patient
should be told what has happened, and medical assistance should be obtained if needed.
The chance of mechanical pulpal involvement may
be greater if a hand excavator is used to remove the
last portions of soft caries in a deep preparation. When
the remaining dentinal wall is thin, the pressure exerted on the excavator may be sufficient to break into
the pulp chamber. Therefore a round bur may be used
at a low speed with light, intermittent pressure for
caries removal. Air-turbine handpieces should be operated just above stalling speed to improve tactile
sense for caries removal. Proceed with caution and inspect the area frequently.

EYE PRECAUTIONS
The operator, assistant, and patient should wear glasses
with side shields to prevent eye damage from airborne
particles during operative procedures utilizing rotary
instrumentation. When using high speeds, particles of
old restorations, tooth structure, bacteria, and other debris are discharged at high speeds from the patient's
mouth. Sufficiently strong high-volume evacuation applied by the dental assistant near the operating site helps
alleviate this problem. However, protective glasses are always indicated when rotary instrumentation is being used.
The dentist is more likely to receive injury than is the assistant or the patient, because of being in a more direct
path of such particles. If an eye is injured, it should be
covered by a clean gauze pad until medical attention
can be obtained.
In addition to routine air-borne debris, occasionally
airborne particles may be produced by matrix failure of molded
abrasive cutting instruments. Hard matrix wheels may
crack or shatter into relatively large pieces. Soft abrasive
wheels or points may increase in temperature during
use, causing the rubber matrix to explosively debond
from the abrasive into fine particles.
Furthermore, precautions must be taken for prevention of eye injury from unusual light sources, such as
visible light-curing units and laser equipment. Dental
personnel and patients should be protected from highintensity visible light using colored plastic shields (attached to the fiber-optic tip). Laser light can be inadvertently reflected from many surfaces in the dental operatory; therefore the operatory should be closed, and
everyone should wear protective goggles (see Laser
Equipment).

cal distress. A noisy environment decreases the ability to
concentrate, increases accident proneness, and reduces
overall efficiency. Extremely loud noises such as explosions, or continuous exposure to high noise levels can
cause permanent damage to the hearing mechanism.
An objectionable high-pitched whine is produced by
some air-turbine handpieces at high speeds. Aside from
the annoying aspect of this noise, there is some possibility that hearing loss can result from continued exposure.
Potential damage to hearing from noise depends on:
(1) the intensity or loudness (decibels [db]), (2) frequency
(cps), and (3) duration (time) of the noise, as well as
(4) the susceptibility of the individual. Increased age, existing ear damage, disease, and medications are other
factors that can accelerate hearing loss.
Normal ears require that the intensity of sound reach
a certain minimum level before the ear can detect it.
This is known as the auditory threshold. It can vary with
frequency and exposure to other sounds. When subjected
to a loud noise of short duration, a protective mechanism
of the ear causes it to lose some sensitivity temporarily.
This is described as a temporary threshold shift. If sufficient time is allowed between exposures, recovery will
be complete. Extended or continuous exposure is much
more likely to result in a permanent threshold shift with
persistent hearing loss. The loss may occur for all frequencies, but often affects high frequency sounds more
severely.
A certain amount of unnoticed noise (ambient noise
level) is present even in a quiet room (20 to 40 db). An
ordinary conversation averages 50 to 70 db in a frequency range of 500 to 2500 cps.
Turbine handpieces with ball bearings, free running
at 30 pounds air pressure, may have noise levels as high
as 70 to 94 db at high frequencies. Noise levels in excess
of 75 db in frequency ranges of 1000 to 8000 cps may
cause hearing damage. There is considerable variation
in noise levels among handpieces by the same manufacturer. Handpiece wear and eccentric rotating instruments
can cause increased noise. Protective measures are recommended when the noise level reaches 85 db with frequency ranges from 300 to 4800 cps. Protection is mandatory in areas where the level transiently reaches 95 db.
The effect of excessive noise levels depends on exposure
times. Normal use of a dental handpiece is one of intermittent application that generally is less than 30 minutes per day. Earplugs can be used to reduce the level of
exposure but have several drawbacks. Room soundproofing helps and can be accomplished with absorbing
materials used on walls and floors. Antinoise devices
can be used to cancel unwanted sounds as well.

EAR PRECAUTIONS
Various sounds are known to affect people in different
ways. Soft music or random sounds like rainfall usually
have a relaxing or sedative effect. Loud noises are generally annoying and may contribute to mental and physi-

I NHALATION PRECAUTIONS
Aerosols and vapors are created by cutting tooth structure and restorative materials. Both aerosols and vapors
are a health hazard to all present. The aerosols are fine

CHAPTER 7

I nstruments and Equipment for Tooth Preparation

dispersions in air of water, tooth debris, microorganisms,
and/or restorative materials. Cutting amalgams or composites produce both submicron particles and vapor.
The particles that may be inadvertently inhaled have
the potential to produce alveolar irritation and tissue reactions. Vapor from cutting amalgams is predominantly
mercury and should be eliminated, as much as possible,
by careful evacuation near the tooth being operated on.
The vapors generated during cutting or polishing by
thermal decomposition of polymeric restorative materials (sealants, acrylic resin, composites) are predominantly
monomers. They may be efficiently eliminated by careful intraoral evacuation during the cutting or polishing
procedures.
A rubber dam protects the patient against oral inhalation of aerosols or vapors, but nasal inhalation of vapor
and finer aerosol may still occur. Disposable masks worn
by dental office personnel filter out bacteria and all but
the finest particulate matter. However, they do not filter
out either mercury or monomer vapors. The biologic effects of mercury hazards, as well as appropriate office
hygiene measures, were discussed in Chapter 4.
REFERENCES
1. American Dental Association: Council on Dental Research
adopts standards for shapes and dimensions of excavating
burs and diamond instruments, JAm DentAssoc 67:943,1963.
2. American National Standards Institute: American Dental Association Specification No. 23 for dental excavating burs, JAm

15.

Hartley JL et al: Cutting characteristics of dental burs as
shown by high speed photomicrography, Armed Forces Med J

16.

Hartley JL, Hudson DC: Modern rotating instruments: burs
and diamond points, Dent Clin North Am 737, Nov 1958.
Henry EE: Influences of design factors on performance of the
inverted cone bur, J Dent Res 35:704-713, 1956.
Henry EE, Peyton FA: The relationship between design and
cutting efficiency of dental burs, J Dent Res 33:281-292,

8(2):209, 1957.

17.
18.

1954.
19.

International Standards Organization:

20.

Switzerland, 1972, International Standards Organization.
Jeffrey IWM et al: C02 laser application to the mineralized
dental tissues-the possibility of iatrogenic sequelae, J Dent

21.

Koblitz FF et al:

18:24-30, 1990.

22.

23.
24.
25.
26.

Atkinson DR, Cobb CM, Killoy WJ: The effect of an air-powder abrasive system on in vitro root surfaces, J Periodontol 55:

Berry EA III, Eakle WS, Summitt JB: Air abrasion: an old technology reborn, Compend Contin Edue Dent 20(8):751-759,1999.
5. Black GV: Operative dentistry, ed 8, Woodstock, Ill, 1947,
Medico-Dental.
6. Black GV: The technical procedures in filling teeth, 1899, Henry
O. Shepard.
7. Boyde A: Airpolishing effects on enamel, dentin and cement,
Brit Dent J 156:287-291, 1984.
8.

Cantwell KR, Aplin AW, Mahler DB: Surface characteristics of
tooth structure after cutting with rotary instruments, Dent
Progr 1(1):42-46, 1960.

Eames WB, Nale JL: A comparison of cutting efficiency of airdriven fissure burs, J Am Dent Assoc 86:412-415, 1973.
10. Eames WB, Reder BS, Smith GA: Cutting efficiency of diamond stones: effect of technique variables, Oper Dent 2(4):
9.

156-164,1977.

11. Frentzen M, Koort HJ, Thiensiri 1: Excimer lasers in dentistry:
future possibilities with advanced technology, Quintessence
Int 23:117-133, 1992.
12.
13.
14.

Galloway SE, Pashley DH: Rate of removal of root structure by
use of the Prophy-Jet device, J Periodontol 58:464-469, 1987.
Grajower R, Zeitchick A, Rajstein J: The grinding efficiency of
diamond burs, J Prosthet Dent 42:422-428, 1979.
Guerini V: A history of dentistry, Philadelphia, 1909, Lea &
Febiger.

(DHEW Publication No. [NIH] 76-670), Washington, DC,
1976, US Government Printing Office.
Kunselman B: Effect of air-polishing shield on the abrasion of
PMMA and dentin (thesis). D.A.T.E., Division of Dental Hygiene, Department of Dental Ecology, School of Dentistry,
Chapel Hill, NC, 1999, University of North Carolina.
Leonard DL, Charlton DG: Performance of high-speed dental handpieces, J Am Dent Assoc 130:1301-1311, 1999.
Lindhe J: Orthogonal cutting of dentine, Odontol Revy
(Malma) 15(suppl 8):11-100,1964.
McCann D: FDA OKs lasers for children, hard tissues, ADA
News, Oct 29, 1998.
Merritt R: Low-energy lasers in dentistry, Brit Dent J 172:90,
1992.

Morrant GA: Burs and rotary instruments: introduction of a
new standard numbering system, Brit Dent J 147(4):97-98,

28.

Myers TD: Lasers in dentistry,

1979.

13-18,1984.
4.

An overview of cutting and wear related phenomena in dentistry. In Pearlman S, editor: The cutting edge

27.

Dent Assoc 104:887,1982.
3.

Standard ISO 2157: head
and neck dimensions of designated shapes of burs, Geneva,

J Am Dent Assoc 122:46-50,

1991.
29.
30.

Nelson RJ, Pelander CE, Kumpula JW: Hydraulic turbine contra-angle handpiece, J Am Dent Assoc 47:324-329, 1953.
Nuckles DB: Status report on rotary diamond instruments,
Council on dental materials and devices, J Am Dent Assoc
97(2):233-235, 1978.

Peterson LG et al: The effect of a jet abrasive instrument (Prophy Jet) on root surfaces, Swed Dent J 9:193-199, 1985.
32. Peyton FA: Effectiveness of water coolants with rotary cutting
instruments, J Am Dent Assoc 56:664-675, 1958.
33. Peyton FA: Temperature rise in teeth developed by rotating
instruments, J Am Dent Assoc 50:629-630, 1955.
34. Sockwell CL: Dental handpieces and rotary cutting instruments, Dent Clin North Am 15(1):219-244, 1971.
35. SS White Dental Manufacturing Company: A century of service to dentistry. Philadelphia, 1944, SS White Dental Manufacturing.
36. Taylor DF, Perkins RR, Kumpula JW: Characteristics of some
air turbine handpieces, J Am Dent Assoc 64:794-805, 1962.
37. Westland IN: The energy requirement of the dental cutting
process, J Oral Rehab 7(1):51, 1980.
38. White JM et al: Effects of pulsed Nd:YAG laser energy on human teeth: a three-year follow-up study, J Am Dent Assoc
31.

124:45-51,1993.
39.

Zakariasen KL, MacDonald R, Boran T: Spotlight on lasersa look at potential benefits, J Am Dent Assoc 122:58-62, 1991.

I.

II.

III.

I V.

V.
VI.

Exposure risks and effect of infections on
dentistry, 347
A. Environment of the dental operatory, 347
1. Airborne contamination, 347
2. Hand-to-surface contamination, 348
3. Cross-infections, 349
4. Patient vulnerability, 349
5. Personnel vulnerability, 349
B. Impact of hepatitis B, 349
C. Impact of HIV and AIDS, 350
Federal and state regulations to reduce exposure
risks from pathogens in blood and other sources
of infection, 350
A. Preparing a written OSHA office exposure
control plan (summary), 351
1. Exposure control plan, 351
2. Emergency and exposure incident plan, 354
3. Training of personnel required by
OSHA, 355
4. OSHA-required records, 355
B. Regulations of other agencies, 355
C. Regulation of infected health care
personnel, 355
OSHA-required training on bloodborne
pathogens, 356
A. AIDS/HIV infection, 356
B. HIV epidemiology and transmission, 356
C. Progression of HIV infection into AIDS, 356
D. Symptoms and oral manifestations, 357
E. Serology of HIV infection, 357
F. HIV risks for clinical personnel, 357
G. HIV risks for dental patients, 358
H. HIV data related to infection control, 358
Viral hepatitis: agents, epidemiology, and
i nfection, 358
A. Viral hepatitis infection, symptoms, and clinical
findings, 359
B. Transmission of viral hepatitis, 359
C. Infection risks for personnel from hepatitis B
and C viruses, 359
D. Serologic tests related to hepatitis A, B,
and C, 360
E. Data related to control of hepatitis B, 360
F. I mmunization against hepatitis A, B, and C, 360
G. Tests for hepatitis B antibody and
boosters, 360
Epidemiology of other infection risks, 361
Exposure assessment protocol, 361
A. Medical history, 362
B. Personal barrier protection, 362
1. Gloves, 362
2. Instructions for handwashing, 362
3. Protective eyewear, masks, and hair
protection, 363
4. Protective overgarments, 363
C. Disposal of clinical waste, 364

D. Needle disposal, 364
E. Precautions to avoid injury exposure, 364
VII. Overview of aseptic techniques, 364
A. Operatory asepsis, 365
1. Protection of operatory surfaces: rationale,
materials, and methods, 365
2. Preparation of semicritical items (attached
to the dental unit for reuse) and noncritical
i tems (supporting or environmental), 366
3. Step-by-step preparation of the dental chair,
dental unit, and instruments, 367
4. Protection of complex devices against
contamination, 368
B. Procedures, materials, and devices for cleaning
i nstruments before sterilization, 369
1. Principles and procedures for handling and
cleaning instruments after treatment, 369
2. Procedures for instrument processing, 369
3. Ultrasonic cleaners and solutions, 370
4. Instrument containment, 371
VIII. Sterilization, 371
A. Steam pressure sterilization (autoclaving), 372
1. Advantages of autoclaves, 372
2. Disadvantages of autoclaves, 372
3. Sterilization of burs in autoclaves, 372
B. Chemical vapor pressure sterilization
( chemiclaving), 373
1. Advantages of chemiclaves, 373
2. Disadvantages of chemiclaves, 373
C. Dry heat sterilization, 373
1. Conventional dry heat ovens, 373
2. Short-cycle, high-temperature dry heat
ovens, 373
3. Advantages of dry heat sterilization, 374
4. Disadvantages of dry heat sterilization, 374
D. Ethylene oxide sterilization, 374
E. Boiling water, 374
F. New methods of sterilization, 374
G. Monitors of sterilization, 374
1. Sterilization indicators and date, 375
2. Process indicator strips, 375
3. Biologic monitoring strips, 375
4. Documentation notebook, 375
H. Liquid sterilants and high-level
disinfectants, 376
1. Uses of high-level disinfection, 376
I. Types of instruments and sterilization
methods, 376
I X. Dental control unit water systems and handpiece
asepsis, 376
A. Handpiece surface contamination control, 376
B. Turbine contamination control, 376
C. Water retraction system correction, 377
D. Inherent water system contamination, 377
E. Control of contamination from spatter and
aerosol, 378

CHAPTER

X.

XI.

Sterilization of handpieces and related rotary
equipment, 378
A. Steam sterilization of handpieces, 378
1. Procedures for handpieces with a metalbearing turbine, 379
2. Procedures for handpieces with a "lubefree" ceramic-bearing turbine, 379
B. Other methods of handpiece sterilization, 379
I nfection control for impressions and related
registrations, 379
A. Factors in making impressions and associated
registrations that will be sent to a remote
l aboratory, 379
B. Concepts for transporting impressions and
associated registrations to a remote
l aboratory, 379

EXPOSURE RISKS AND EFFECT
OF INFECTIONS ON DENTISTRY
Pervasive increases in serious transmissible diseases over
the last few decades have created global concern and impacted the treatment mode of all American health care
practitioners. Every health care specialty that involves
contact with mucosa, blood, or blood-contaminated body
fluids is now regulated. The goal is to ensure compliance
with universal barriers and other methods to minimize
infection risks.
While the objective of operative dentistry has been to
provide the highest standard of care, a prevailing concern has been to minimize the patient's anxiety of treatment. Providing a supportive, informal, relaxed, and
nonthreatening operatory environment has been one emphasis. Although that concern has not waned, emphasis
has now expanded to assuring and demonstrating to patients that they are well protected from risks of infectious
disease. Universal use of treatment gloves, masks, protective eyewear, overgarments, plastic barriers to protect
equipment, proper use of disinfectants, and instrument
sterilization now work together to provide a professional
health care atmosphere that conveys conscientious protection and treatment according to sound principles of
infection control in keeping with current regulation (Fig.
8-1). Information on regulations, diseases, and infection
control presented here is based on a manual developed
by the authors.

XII.

8

I nfection Control

1. Procedures for handling and transporting
silicone (vinyl polysiloxane) or rubberbased impression material and any
associated registrations to a remote
l aboratory, 380
2. Procedures for handling and transporting
items from an aqueous impression material
technique (using alginate [irreversible hydrocolloid], reversible hydrocolloid, or polyether impressions) and any associated
registrations to a remote laboratory, 381
C. Procedures for handling impressions and
associated registrations for an on-site
l aboratory, 382
Summary and other information sources, 382

masks, gowns, and protective eyewear while treating
patients.
Microbial exposures in the dental operatory involve
both airborne contamination (see Fig. 8-2) (an exposure
concern for personnel) and digital contamination of
surfaces (i.e., hands soiled with saliva that repeatedly
contact operatory equipment and surfaces and return to
the patient's mouth during treatments). Digital contamination is an exposure concern for both patients and
personnel.
Airborne Contamination. A high-speed handpiece is
capable of creating airborne contaminants from both
bacterial residents in the dental unit water spray system
and from microbial contaminants from saliva, tissues,
blood, plaque, and fine debris cut from carious teeth (see
Fig. 8-2). With respect to size, these airborne contaminants exist in the form of spatter, mists, and aerosols.
Aerosols consist of invisible particles ranging from 50 um
to approximately 5 um that can remain suspended in the
air and breathed for hours. Aerosols and larger particles may carry agents of any respiratory infection borne

ENVIRONMENT OF THE DENTAL OPERATORY
To comprehend the problem of microbial contamination
that confronts dentistry, it is necessary to examine the
dental treatment environment. Because it was poorly understood in the past, personnel went unprotected from
unseen exposures.
For most of the twentieth century, general dentistry
was routinely practiced without barriers to protect eyes,
nose, mouth, and hands as shown in Fig. 8-2. Not until
1991 were dental personnel required to wear gloves,

FIG 8-1 Personal protective equipment worn to comply with
OSHA's Bloodborne Disease Standard.

CHAPTER

8

I nfection Control

can reduce exposure risks. 12,38 To help reduce exposure
to airborne particles capable of transmitting respiratory
infections, adequate air circulation should be maintained and masks should be kept in place until air exchange in the room has occurred or until personnel
leave the operatory 26
Hand-to-Surface Contamination. With saliva-contaminated hands, the hygienist, dentist, and assistant
could repeatedly contact or handle unprotected operatory surfaces during treatments if not careful. The invisible trail of saliva left on such contaminated surfaces often defies either awareness or effective cleanup. Poorly
cleaned soiled surfaces provide another source of gross
environmental contamination to potentially contaminate
both personnel and patients. In fact, cross-contamination
of patients by such contaminated surfaces was documented in a clinical office radiology setting. 9,126

FIG . 8-2 Dentistry as it may have been practiced in the past.
Rotary instrumentation can expose personnel to heavy spatter
of more than 50-um
particles and mists. Aerosol particles of
l ess than 5 Am remain suspended and can reach the alveoli if
not stopped by a barrier. Air purification is a growing concern.
(Courtesy of Laminaire Corporation, Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.)

by the patient. However, no scientific evidence indicates
that fine aerosols have transmitted the bloodborne infection caused by hepatitis B virus (HBV).61 There is
even less likelihood that aerosols have transmitted human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), as evidenced by the
extremely low transmissibility of HIV in both dental procedures and homes of infected persons. 18,28,29,31 Mists that
become visible in a beam of light, consist of droplets estimated to approach or exceed 50 um. Heavy mists tend
to gradually settle from the air after 5 to 15 minutes .'2
Both aerosols and mists produced by the cough of a patient with unrecognized active pulmonary or pharyngeal tuberculosis (TB) are very likely to transmit the infection. 26 However, it has not been shown that oral fluids
of tubercular patients aerosolized during a dental treatment can transmit TB.12 Spatter consists of particles generally larger than 50 um and are even visible splashes.
Spatter has a distinct trajectory, usually falling within
3 feet of the patient's mouth, thus having the potential
for coating the face and outer garments of the attending
personnel. 12 Spatter or splashing of mucosa is considered
a potential route of infection for dental personnel by
bloodborne pathogens . 28.38
Barrier protection of personnel using masks, protective eyewear, gloves, and gowns is now a standard requirement for dental procedures. A pretreatment mouthrinse, rubber dam, and high velocity air evacuation also

Another study used water-soluble red-fluorescent
poster paint (plain water-soluble fluorescent-red tempera in water) as a visible substitute for saliva to elevate
awareness and facilitate problem solving in infection
control. In this study, a hygienist was photographed
treating a manikin fitted with dentures wetted with the
red paint" ,"' (Fig. 8-3). The results demonstrated how extensively surfaces were smeared, how time-consuming,
expensive, and difficult the contaminated surfaces were
to clean, and how difficult it was to identify, clean, and
disinfect objects covered with actual films of invisible
saliva. Red poster paint is still used for dramatic training exercises, workshops, and poster displays to demonstrate or evaluate contamination control in dental
operatories.
Another study used an invisible fluorescent dye
added to the water delivered to the handpiece to evaluate airborne contamination of personnel during dental
treatments . 12 Data were gathered after cutting natural
teeth that had been placed into a teaching manikin. After only 5-minute treatments, fluids from the artificial
mouth coated and contaminated personnel, equipment,
and other environmental surfaces. This contamination
was more pervasive and greater than that illustrated in
the red dye studies.
Bacteriologic contamination of dental operatory surfaces also was investigated in 10 private dental offices after the surfaces were cleaned and disinfected . 71 Sampling
confirmed widespread residual contamination with oral
bacteria. Thus contamination was not controlled by conscientious use of cleaning and disinfecting procedures.
Items or areas still contaminated after cleaning included
handpieces; unprotected lamp handles; air-water syringe handles; control switches on the patient's chair;
tubes, jars, and canisters of treatment materials; seat
edges and rests of the dentist's and assistant's chairs;
faucet knobs; cabinet, drawer, and operatory tray handles; room light switches, and operatory telephones. It is
not difficult to understand how telephone handles at the

CHAPTER 8

receptionists' desks also became heavily contaminated
with saliva bacteria. Before handpiece sterilization requirements, handpieces and other equipment found contaminated were cleaned only by wiping with disinfectant before reuse. (When nondental offices that were
never disinfected were sampled as controls, phone handles and other similar surfaces were comparatively devoid of saliva bacteria.) Amalgam mixing equipment,
light-curing units, and camera equipment are also subject to heavy contamination by soiled hands. Maintaining
no contamination of these items and areas is a priority objective today.
From these studies, it is apparent that controlling contamination of equipment and personnel is essential to
protect both patients and personnel in this operatory
zone of potential heavy contamination. Barrier protection of personnel and equipment, instrument sterilization, and methods of avoiding direct contact with various surfaces are required. 12,38,71
Cross-Infections. Most information on cross-infection
and infection control concepts has been derived from
data collected in hospitals. Among hospital patients and
personnel, cross-infection and the routes of transmission come directly under the scrutiny of physicians,
nurses, and surveillance of infection control personnel.
However, in dental and other outpatient treatment settings, evidence of oral or systemic cross-infections is
much more difficult to obtain. Such patients may have
contracted infections elsewhere, before or after having a
dental treatment. Patients infected usually are not
aware of the source of their infection and go elsewhere
for diagnosis and treatment of nonoral infections. Infection outbreaks are usually detected in patients or personnel only when they occur in clusters recognized by
other health providers or are detected by epidemiologic
studies and investigative surveys of personnel.
Patient Vulnerability. Although infection risks for
dental patients have not been as well investigated as
those of hospital patients, they appear to be low. Nine
cluster cases of dentist-to-patient transmission of HB
and one cluster case of HIV have been documented
since 1971. Since 1986, when infection control practices
became widespread, no cluster cases of HB transmission to patients have been reported that were related to
dentistry. 18,20,21,15

Personnel Vulnerability. When dental personnel experience exposure to saliva, blood, and possible injury
from sharp instrumentation while treating patients, they
are more vulnerable to infections if they have not had
the proper immunizations or used the proper protective
barriers. It is unfortunate that the need for proper control of exposures and infections was not realized before
the occurrence of the bloodborne infection hepatitis B
( HB), which poses a serious threat to all dental personnel49 (see Impact of Hepatitis B). Fear that HIV would
take a similar or worse toll did not materialize, pri-

I nfection Control

FIG 8-3 Distribution of saliva spatter during a dental hygiene

procedure. There is a need to wear a long-sleeved overgarment, mask, protective eyewear, and gloves.
marily because of the implementation of adequate infection control principles and surveillance. Patient-to-dental
health care worker transmission of occupational disease
is low. 20 Dental personnel who have treated infectious
patients on a daily basis for years in hospital dental services have found infection control methods to be highly
effective . 53 Infection control (IC) has helped dramatically allay risks and concerns of personnel in the private
dental office, as well as instilling confidence in a safe environment for both patients and personnel. Private dentists continue to use IC as a way to build their practice.
Epidemiologic information about HB, hepatitis C,
HIV, and other relevant infections is important. Examining the impact of these serious diseases provides the
impetus to both use and improve effective methods of
IC. It also may resist complacency about the risks from
current and emerging diseases. Vulnerability of dental
personnel before the institution of IC standards provides the best barometer of the potential for infection
transmission in dentistry. Findings related to HBV and
HIV illustrate this point.
I MPACT OF HEPATITIS B
HB was the first infectious disease to gain attention as a
risk for health care personnel who have blood and
body-fluid contact. General physicians and surgeons experienced HB infection rates of 19% and 28%, respectively From 1982 to 1986, various blood sample studies
in the United States showed that 14% to 28% of general
dentists, 13% of dental assistants, and 17% of dental
hygienists had evidence of past infection with HB.2 ,11 ,49 ,93
If only 20% of the approximately 120,000 dentists in the
United States had been infected by 1982, 24,000 dentists
would have had HB. HB is transmitted sexually as well
as parenterally. Transmission has been shown to occur
in 23% to 42% of heterosexual partners of infected persons. 61,62 From these data, 5000 to 10,000 sexual partners,
spouses, or families of the dentists with hepatitis may

CHAPTER 8

I nfection Control

have been infected. If we apply the 2% mortality rate
that characterizes HB, within 20 to 30 years after initial
infection, 480 of the dentists who were infected with HB
by 1982 will have died.
Fortunately a vaccine has dramatically curtailed HB infection among dental personnel who have been effectively immunized. However, IC procedures remain a major concern

to prevent cross-infection among patients . 35

I MPACT OF HIV AND AIDS
In view of the high HB infection rate among dental personnel, epidemiologists anticipated that acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) would decimate the
workforce population in dentistry. By the mid-1980s
HIV had infected approximately 1 million persons in the
United States, most of whom were high-risk persons in
metropolitan areas. By 1988, of over 1,000 dentists surveyed in high-risk areas who practiced with bare hands,
only one was found infected who claimed no other exposure risks. Infections have since been suspected in
five more dentists without other apparent risks. However, no dentists for whom negative HIV blood tests
were established at the time of job-related exposure
have acquired job-related HIV infection. 37,76
Public alarm was intense when a Florida dentist with
clinical AIDS transmitted his unique strain of HIV to six
patients in his large dental practice." ," No other instance of clinician-to-patient transmission of HIV has
been established in dentistry. That isolated Florida instance of HIV transmission contrasts dramatically with
the transmissibility of HB. Twenty reports have documented that over 300 patients treated by HB-infected
health care workers acquired HB. Nine of the reports in
the United States listed over 140 patients infected with
HB by dental practitioners that caused several deaths 43,55
Evidence indicates that the Florida cluster of HIV infections and most treatment-related HB infections from infected clinicians to patients could have been prevented
by conscientious use of IC procedures . The unfortunate Florida outbreak was nonetheless tragic for the individuals and families involved. The ensuing public demand for required testing of all health care personnel
was reduced to voluntary testing, and states were required to enforce Public Health Service guidelines for IC
in all health care facilities." However, public concern still
focuses unprecedented attention on the standards of IC used in
all health care professions, particularly in dentistry. 23,24,29,30,58

Despite the deficit in patient infection data and despite the misplaced concern regarding the transmissibility of HIV infection in dentistry, the Florida cluster of
HIV infections and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations have provided an intense impetus to strengthen and control aseptic standards in all health care disciplines in a brief time span. 91
Dental students and auxiliary personnel, as well as patients, are all the final beneficiaries of the dramatic

changes that have occurred. IC is now accepted as a standard of care by dentists.

In 1991, the American Association of Dental Schools
( AADS) published curriculum guidelines to be used in
dental schools for teaching the dental care of patients
with bloodborne infectious diseases. The guidelines
specify a comprehensive array of basic and clinical topics including a description of transmissible infections,
their epidemiology and mechanisms of transmission,
principles and methods of IC, use of barriers, instrument sterilization, and disinfection. The topics must be
taught with the prevailing concept of universal precautions (i.e., treating all patients as infectious). The content
was not intended to be presented in a separate course,
but to be integrated into existing courses as appropriate.
This chapter integrates applicable topics on transmissible diseases, epidemiology, and IC specified by the AADS curriculum guidelines into the teaching and practice of operative
dentistry. Content also includes information regarding

federal and other requirements related to IC.
To meet clinical AADS guidelines and state and other
requirements, dental schools must prepare and maintain a written manual of IC policies and procedures.'
The manual standardizes and documents policies and
procedures to protect patients and personnel as well as
training students, faculty, and personnel in those regards. It is convenient to include required OSHA, state,
and other regulations in sections of the same manual.
Private dental offices develop an office IC manual for the
same reasons. Much of the content in this chapter can be
adapted to such a manual.

FEDERAL AND STATE
REGULATIONS TO REDUCE
EXPOSURE RISKS FROM
PATHOGENS IN BLOOD
AND OTHER SOURCES
OF INFECTION
The term infection control program (IC program) has a long
tradition in hospital usage. IC programs, such as those recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the American Dental Association
( ADA), are designed to protect both patients and personnel .
The federal OSHA uses a different term, exposure control plan, for required office programs designed to protect personnel against risks of exposure to infection.
Guidelines and requirements of other agencies that pertain to areas of IC not covered by OSHA are discussed
in the next section. State occupational safety and health
agencies are now enforcing regulations finalized by the
federal OSHA, whose Final Rule (or The Standard) on occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens was
published in December, 1991. 95
The OSHA rule derives from the original Occupational
Safety and Health Act passed by the U.S. Congress in
1970.' 2 ' This Act identified employers' obligations to pro-

CHAPTER 8

tect employees from occupational risks. That Act has
been the basis for all subsequent federal safety and
health regulations. According to the Act, each employer
must furnish employees with a place and conditions of
employment free from recognized hazards that presently cause, or are likely to cause, death or serious harm
to employees. The Act created the Occupational Safety
and Health Agency (OSHA) in the U.S. Department of
Labor. In the late 1980s labor unions petitioned OSHA in
federal courts to extend chemical hazards protection
standards to employees in the health care professions.
Shortly thereafter, concern about transmitting HIV to
health care workers stimulated the unions to take similar
action to obtain the OSHA regulation of blood and bodyfluid exposure among health care personnel.
Thus the Act covers two regulated programs of compliance: (1) an OSHA Hazard Communications program
concerning risks from environmental and chemical hazards in the workplace (see Safety and Efficacy in Chapter 4), and (2) an OSHA Bloodborne Pathogens program
that addresses control of "occupational exposure to blood
and other potentially infectious materials . 95,96 The OSHA
hazard communications program, which also must be
implemented in every dental office, applies mainly to
chemicals .96
Other dental office requirements, relating to environmental safety features also should be recorded in the
same office manual and include maintenance of a complete first aid kit, full oxygen tank, pocket resuscitation
masks, a fire evacuation plan, fire extinguishers with annual inspection and actual personnel training updated,
and general environmental safety provisions such as
clear passageways without mechanical obstructions,
clearly marked exits, electrical safety (e.g., ground fault
outlets near sinks), and adherence to radiation and nitrous oxide safety standards. An Occupational Safety
and Health poster, stating the obligations of employers
and employees to follow health and safety regulations,
and workers rights and recourses, must be displayed in
a convenient place for employees to see. State OSHA
offices may be consulted to obtain specific information,
manuals, documents, posters, and so on. County and
state Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) offices
should be consulted regarding requirements for storage
and disposal of infectious waste.
All aspects of the OSHA bloodborne pathogens program to protect employees were required in every dental office by July 6, 1992. 95 Federal Law 42, passed by
Congress in 1991, required state public health departments to apply similar standards or follow the CDC
guidelines of IC to all dental care personnel to ensure
protection of patients. 58 Thus, under Federal and State
laws, "employers (including dentists operating nonincorporated offices) must comply with IC regulations.
Copies of the OSHA Bloodborne Pathogens Standard of
1991 are available from the U.S. Government Printing

I nfection Control

Office, Superintendent of Documents, Washington, DC
20402 (specify GPO order no. 069-001-0040-8). A federal
translation of the standard (but not a substitute) for dentistry can be requested free of charge by sending a return address label to the OSHA Publications Office,
Room N-3101, 200 Constitution Ave. NW, Washington
DC 20210, or it can be downloaded from OSHA's website. Required copies of regulations, posters, reporting
forms, and other materials for training purposes are
available from local state offices of the Division of
Labor or of the Occupational Safety and Health Agency.
Helpful brochures and manuals that provide copies of
regulations, forms, and more detailed instructions also
are available from some state health department divisions of dental health or from state and national dental
associations.

PREPARING A WRITTEN OSHA OFFICE
EXPOSURE CONTROL PLAN (SUMMARY)
Exposure Control Plan. A written exposure control
plan must be accessible to employees with exposure
risks. The plan must be reviewed and updated at least
annually and when alterations in procedures create new
occupational exposures.
The office exposure control plan applies to all operatory and laboratory personnel at risk for an exposure
(i.e., dentist, hygienist, dental assistant, and dental laboratory technicians, as well as dental equipment repair
personnel and laundry and custodial personnel who
handle waste or laundry from operatories). These are
persons who have regular, potential contact with blood
and body fluids. This exposure determination shall be
made without regard to use of personal protective
equipment. All such persons must be listed in the exposure control plan by name, job, and kind of exposure potential (e.g., intraoral treatments, exposure to spatter of
blood-contaminated oral fluids, cleaning and sterilizing
of sharp instruments). Dentists who are employed by an
office, corporation, or institution also are listed as personnel to whom all rules apply. Receptionists who never
assist or work in the operatory and who do not have
contact with blood or body fluid-contaminated charts
would be exempt. If personnel do encounter blood and/
or body fluid-contamination on charts or other items,
then they must be listed. Appropriate training, immunization, protective equipment, and materials must be
provided for all at-risk personnel. Clerical hospital personnel who handle blood-contaminated forms have
shown elevated HB infection rates. Paper cuts were a
likely mechanism of transfer.
Dental students do not come directly under OSHA
regulations unless they are employees of the school
with duties that involve bloodborne pathogen exposure. However, in compliance with Federal and State
policies, school accreditation requirements, and university policies, all dental schools have an IC manual of

CHAPTER 8

I nfection Control

standard operating procedures that applies to students.
These policies usually are based on the school's OSHA
exposure control plan for faculty and staff. As future
employers or employees, dental students will have to
become acquainted with OSHA's exposure control plan.
A simple implementation schedule must be prepared
to document how and when various aspects of compliance with the exposure control plan are provided for
new and old employees. This can be done by notating a
copy of the OSHA regulation.
The OSHA exposure control plan uses terms that require definition. Exposure is defined in the OSHA regulation as, "specific eye, mouth, other mucous membrane, nonintact skin, or parenteral contact with blood
or other potentially infectious materials (OPIM) that results from performance of an employee's duties."" Only
in dentistry is saliva considered a potentially infectious material, since oral manipulations and dental treatments routinely
cause saliva to become contaminated with the patient's blood.
Universal precautions means that all patients and bloodcontaminated body fluids are treated as infectious.
Means of compliance are expressed in the OSHA terminology of environmental safety engineers. Work practice controls and engineering controls are terms that describe
precautions (e.g., careful handling of sharp instruments,
and not putting hands into sharps containers) and use of
devices to reduce contamination risks (e.g., using highvolume suction, rubber dam, and protective sharps containers). Personal protective equipment (PPE) is the term
used for barriers, such as gloves, gowns, or masks. Housekeeping is a term that relates to cleanup of treatmentsoiled operatory equipment, instruments, counters, and
floors, as well as to management of used gowns and
waste. Housekeeping also relates to cautions for servicing contaminated equipment and using only mechanical
means to clean contaminated broken glass.
Standard operating procedures (SOPs) is a term used in
former OSHA regulations for step-by-step descriptions

FIG 8-4 I n current dental practice PPE provides barriers
against spatter and aerosols during patient treatments.

of tasks. Such task descriptions are preferred for training new personnel and comprise part of the training
manual.
Obtain and read a copy of the Final OSHA Rule on
Bloodborne Pathogens to be apprised of complete and exact regulatory details. Following is a summary of the
current OSHA regulations specifying what employers
must furnish, directions employers must provide, and
compliance required of employees:
1. Employers must provide HB immunization to employees without charge within 10 days of employment. The employer also must provide a copy of
the OSHA regulations on bloodborne pathogens
from which this information is taken to the health
care professional responsible for providing the HB
vaccine.
2. Employers must require that universal precautions
be observed to prevent contact with blood and other
potentially infectious materials. Saliva is considered
a blood-contaminated body fluid in relation to dental treatments .
3. Employers must implement engineering controls to
reduce production of contaminated spatter, mists,
and aerosols. Examples are use of a rubber dam,
high-volume suction, rubber prophy cup instead of
brushes, scaling instruments for patients with respiratory infections instead of cavitron, and hard-wall
containers to avoid contact with disposable and
reusable sharps . 42- 50,90
4. Employers must implement work practice control
precautions to minimize splashing, spatter, or contact of bare hands with contaminated surfaces.
Never contact telephones, switches, door handles,
or faucet handles with soiled gloves. The subsequent items (5 to 18) also are work practice control
regulations.
5. Employers must provide facilities and instruction for
washing hands after removing gloves, and for washing other skin immediately or as soon as feasible
after contact with blood or potentially infectious materials (Figs. 8-4, 8-5, and 8-6). Flush eye or mucosa
immediately or as soon as feasible after any contact
with blood or potentially infectious materials.
6. Employers must prescribe safe handling of needles
and other sharp items. Needles must not be bent or
cut. When it can be shown necessary, needles may
be resheathed with mechanical aids or other onehanded techniques (see Chapter 10).
7. Employers must prescribe disposal of single-use
needles, wires, carpules, and sharps as close to the
place of use as possible, as soon as feasible, in hardwalled, leakproof containers that are closable, from
which needles cannot be easily spilled. Containers
must be red or bear a biohazard label and must be
kept upright and closed when moved (see Chapter

CHAPTER 8

I nfection Control

10). Teeth must not be discarded into trash but can
be given to the patient or discarded into sharps
containers.
8. Contaminated reusable sharp instruments must not
be stored or processed in a manner that requires employees to reach hands into containers to retrieve
them. Use a basket or cassette to place instruments
into and retrieve them from soaking pans and ultrasonic cleaners. Use biohazard-labeled or red pans
that are leakproof and puncture resistant.
9. Employers must prohibit eating, drinking, handling
contact lenses, and application (but not wearing) of
facial cosmetics in contaminated environments such
as operatories and cleanup areas. Ban storage of food
and drinks in refrigerators or other spaces where
blood or infectious materials are stored.
10. Place blood and contaminated specimens (e.g., impressions that have not been well-cleaned and
well-disinfected, teeth, biopsy specimens, blood
specimens, and culture specimens) to be shipped,
transported, or stored into suitable closed containers that prevent leakage. An adequately strong plastic bag can be used for impressions. The surface of
all containers must be clean or enclosed in another
clean, red, or biohazard-labeled container.
11. At no cost to employees, employers must provide
them with necessary PPE and clear directions for
use of appropriate universal barrier protection in
treating all patients and for all other contact with
blood or other infectious materials (see Figs. 8-1 and
8-4). PPE must not allow blood or other potentially
infectious material to pass through to contaminate
personal clothing, skin, or mucous membranes.

Namely, employers must provide protective gloves,
or hypoallergenic gloves as needed; appropriate
protective body clothing such as gowns, "the type
and characteristics will depend upon the task and
degree of exposure anticipated"95; protective eyewear, chin-length face shields, goggles, or glasses
with solid protective side shields; masks; pocket resuscitation masks for cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR); and surgical caps or shoe covers to be
worn when required for surgery or whenever heavy
contamination can be reasonably anticipated.
12. Ensure that employees correctly use and discard
PPE or properly prepare it for reuse. Provide adequate facilities to discard gowns or laundry in the
location where they are used. Note: A face shield
does not substitute for a mask.
13. As soon as feasible after treatments, attend to
housekeeping requirements including floors, countertops, sinks, and other environmental equipment
that are subject to contamination. Also included are
the use of protective covers that are changed after
each appointment, or thoroughly clean and disinfect
contaminated surfaces and operatory equipment
items that cannot be covered, discarded, or removed
and sterilized. (See Operatory Asepsis, and Procedures, Materials, and Devices for Cleaning Instruments Before Sterilization for details.)
14. Employers must provide a written schedule for
cleaning and decontaminating equipment, work
surfaces, and contaminated floors. For contami
nated spills, prescribe an appropriate method of
cleaning and then applying disinfecting methods.
Broken glassware that may be contaminated must

FIG. 8-5

FIG . 8-6

To remove a contaminated glove, pinch the palm side
of the outer cuff surface with the gloved fingers of the other
hand. Pull off the glove, inverting it. Both gloves can be removed simultaneously in this manner. Alternately, after removing one, insert bare fingers under the cuff to grasp and
pull off the remaining glove. Discard gloves safely.

To wash hands after removing treatment gloves, operate the pump as shown with the clean underside of a wrist.
Also, operate faucet handles the same way to avoid contamination or use foot controls. Never touch the handles with contaminated gloves.

CHAPTER 8

I nfection Control

be cleaned with mechanical means, and never with
gloved hands.
15. Contaminated equipment that requires service must
first be decontaminated, or a biohazard label must
be used to indicate contaminated parts.
16. Contaminated sharps are regulated waste; discard
in hard-walled containers. For OSHA purposes in
dentistry, regulated waste also means: (1) liquid or
semiliquid blood or other potentially infectious materials, (2) contaminated items that would release
blood or other potentially infectious materials in a liquid or semiliquid state if compressed, and (3) items
that are caked with blood or other potentially infectious materials and are capable of releasing these
materials during handling. Properly dispose of such
regulated waste in biohazard-labeled or red closable
bags or other labeled containers that prevent leakage. Containers contaminated on the outside must
be placed in a secondary container. The secondary
container also must be closable, prevent leakage,
and be red or biohazard-labeled. Containers or bags
must be closed when moved. If outsides of reusable
containers are likely to become contaminated, they
must be inspected, decontaminated, and cleaned on
a regularly scheduled basis, and as soon as feasible
if they become visibly contaminated. Cabinets or
other storage areas on the premises in which bloodcontaminated waste is stored must be identified by
a biohazard label.
17. Place reusable contaminated sharp instruments into
a basket in a hard-walled container for transportation to the clean-up area. Personnel must not reach
hands into containers of contaminated sharps.
18. Employers must provide laundering of protective
garments used for universal precautions at no cost
to employees. Handle contaminated laundry as little
as possible without sorting or rinsing. Bag all soiled
linens where they are used in a color-coded bag recognized as requiring universal precautions.

Emergency and Exposure Incident Plan. An emergency and exposure incident plan must be developed
for employees. A separate plan is needed for students if
they use different medical care resources or methods for
reporting exposure incidents.
A person must be identified who is the program coordinator and contact person when emergencies arise. That
person also may become the trainer for office personnel.
OSHA dictates an exposure incident plan that emphasizes documentation of incidents and their follow-up.
During training sessions, personnel must be told what
to do in an emergency, but documenting a plan of medical emergency care is an equally important aspect of
employee protection. Five requirements of an incident plan
should be addressed:

1. Exposures to mucosa may not be associated with an
injury, or an exposure incident may involve minor or
severe injury (e.g., from a cutting instrument). Rapid
and thorough cleaning of a wound or washing a
splashed eye or mouth as quickly as possible is the
most important first step to minimize infection risks.
Blood tends to collect on the surface of puncture
wounds created by solid pointed instruments, so
washing puncture wounds is just as important. Persons must be identified in the office to provide any
help, direction, or transportation needed to obtain
medical care. A brief written plan should be formulated of how to rapidly access medical attention. This
content should comprise the first part of the exposure
incident plan. Sufficient time will still be available for
a designated responsible person to contact the patient
and transmit medical records as well as other information to the attending physician, as presented next.
2. The exposure source patient's written permission
must be obtained to copy and convey his or her medical history to the attending physician or to obtain
other medical records regarding the patient. However, knowledge of risk behavior, blood test results,
or other pertinent information usually can be conveyed verbally in confidence without permission in
case of exposure. Consult local laws. Some states
only prescribe transmission of the name, address,
and phone number of the patient and the name and
phone number of the patient's physician to the physician attending the exposed person. The patient's
physician is then contacted by the examining physician who deals with testing the patient.
3. As directed by OSHA regulations, employers must
provide a copy of the exposure incident plan and explain it to employees. Employers must document the
route and circumstances of the exposure, identifying
the source patient when possible. Employers must
provide and pay for exposure incident evaluation
and follow-up evaluations for an exposed employee
unless paid for by workman's compensation.
4. If other local regulations do not prevail, employers
must also: (1) identify and contact the source patient
if possible; (2) obtain the source person's permission
to be tested, unless he or she is already known to be
infected; (3) have the source person's blood tested,
as soon as feasible, for evidence of current HIV and
HBV infection by a health care professional (e.g., if
blood is available, some states permit testing without
permission in exposure instances); (4) provide results
to the exposed employee in confidence (state laws
often require counseling of the source patient for
HIV testing as well as the exposed person); (5) test
the employee's blood, with his or her permission, as
soon as feasible; (6) hold any available sample of the
employee's blood for 90 days if consent is not given

CHAPTER 8

for HIV testing to provide for a change of mind; and
(7) provide postexposure prophylaxis to the employee when medically indicated according to recommendations of the U.S. Public Health Service.
5. The attending physician must be provided with a
copy of OSHA regulations from which this information is taken, documentation collected regarding the
incident, results of the source person's tests, and employee's immunization records and any other relevant
medical records. A written report from the attending
physician must be obtained by the employer and
provided to the employee within 15 days of the evaluation completion stating that the employee has been
informed of results, possible infection consequences,
and any further evaluation or treatment needed that
relates to the exposure incident. Unrelated diagnoses
or findings remain confidential.
Training of Personnel Required by OSHA. Occupational safety guidelines require that new office personnel who will have contact with blood and bloodcontaminated body fluids receive initial training in IC.
Moreover, retraining is required annually and whenever the exposure control protocol changes . 95
During inspections, OSHA representatives interview
employees rather than supervisors to evaluate their understanding of universal precautions, exposures, and
how to protect themselves. Training of personnel must
contain the following elements as listed in the OSHA
standard
1. An accessible copy of the regulatory text of this
standard and an explanation of its contents
2. A general explanation of the epidemiology and
symptoms of bloodborne diseases
3. An explanation of the modes of transmission of
bloodborne pathogens
4. An explanation of the employer's exposure control
plan and the means by which employees can obtain
a copy of the written plan
5. An explanation of the appropriate methods for recognizing tasks and other activities that may involve
exposure to blood and other potentially infectious
materials
6. An explanation of the use and limitations of methods that will prevent or reduce exposure, including
appropriate engineering controls, work practices,
and PPE
7. Information on the types, proper use, location, removal, handling, decontamination, and disposal of
personal protective equipment
8. An explanation of the basis for selection of personal
protective equipment
9. Information on the HB vaccine, including information on its efficacy, safety, method of administration,

I nfection Control

benefits of being vaccinated, and that the vaccine
and vaccination will be offered free of charge
10. Information on the appropriate actions to take and
persons to contact in an emergency involving blood
or other potentially infectious materials
11. An explanation of the procedure to follow if an exposure incident occurs, including the method of reporting the incident and the medical follow-up that
will be made available
12. Information on the postexposure evaluation and
follow-up that the employer is required to provide
for the employee following an exposure incident
13. An explanation of the signs and labels and/or colorcoding required by the OSHA standard
14. An opportunity for interactive questions and answers
with the person conducting the training session
15. Additional specific information must be provided
regarding the details and cleanup schedules specific
for employees' operatory and facilities.
OSHA-Required Records. Job classification and immunization and medical records of personnel must be
kept for 30 years by the office or a designated physician
for OSHA inspection, or disposed of according to requirements. Training records must be kept for 3 years
from the date of training. Exposure incidents must be
tabulated and posted according to OSHA requirements.
Details are provided in the regulations. An interpretation of these regulations for dentistry has since been
published . 122 Some variations from these and other
OSHA regulations may later be specified for dentistry as
a result of petitions made by the ADA. Consult current
information.
REGULATIONS OF OTHER AGENCIES
State public health services and dental licensing boards
complete the spectrum of IC regulatory agencies. Most
specify the IC guidelines of the ADA and the U.S.
Public Health Service CDC, but focus more upon tasks
and procedures necessary for patient protection in
dentistry.
REGULATION OF INFECTED HEALTH
CARE PERSONNEL
Concerns about the possible transmission of AIDS from
infected health care personnel to patients has led the
U.S. Public Health Service to recommend additional
precautions. All health care personnel who perform invasive,
exposure-prone treatments are urged to voluntarily obtain
testing for HBV and HIV infections .23
Exposure-prone procedures include simultaneous use
of the operator's fingers and sharp instrumentation in a
highly confined or poorly visualized anatomic site, such
as the mouth, where tissues are cut or bleeding can occur. Clinical persons are considered infected when they

CHAPTER 8

I nfection Control

test positive for antibody against HIV or for surface
antigen and e antigen of HB. Infected health care personnel are advised not to perform exposure-prone procedures unless they have sought counsel from an expert review panel and
been advised under what circumstances they may continue to
perform these procedures according to the experience and skill
of the clinical person involved.
As defined by the CDC, a review panel may consist of
the worker's physician, an infectious disease specialist
with expertise in epidemiology of HIV and HBV transmission, another health care professional with expertise
in the type of procedures performed, and a local public
health official .13
OSHA-REQUIRED TRAINING ON
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS
AIDS/HIV INFECTION
AIDS is the last stage of a debilitating, eventually fatal
human disease. AIDS may develop in 1.5 to 11 or more
years after an initial infection with HIV 6,54 (HIV-1 is the
predominant type; HIV -2 is a type found in some West
African emigrants.) HIV is a relatively fragile ribonucleic
acid (RNA) retrovirus that is easily destroyed in the dry
state in 1 to 2 minutes by most disinfectants.5.28,29,'09
HIV EPIDEMIOLOGY AND TRANSMISSION
Since its recognition in 1981, HIV has infected several
million people in the United States and, by 1998, produced AIDS in over 688,000 persons . HIV is transmitted mainly by blood, blood-contaminated body fluids,
semen, and vaginal fluids. High-risk behaviors or situations that define high-risk groups include having multiple sex partners of the same or opposite sex; having a
sexual partner that is high-risk or infected; intravenous
drug abuse; hemophiliac treatment; blood transfusion
before spring, 1985; and infants born to an infected parent. 3,24,63,65 Casual, nonsexual contact, including social kissing
and sharing towels or food among family members in a household with an AIDS victim, has not transmitted the infection.
In 1990, AIDS was predominately distributed among
males with promiscuous homosexual and bisexual behavior (54%), intravenous drug users (23%), and heterosexuals with multiple sexual partners (5%). Women comprised 12% of those with AIDS; most were intravenous
drug abusers, and others were sexually infected .24 A
wide incidence of HIV infection was found in studies of
prostitutes reported in 1987 (none in Las Vegas, 19% in
Miami, and 69% in Newark) . 66 Persons transfused with
infected blood or blood products, such as hemophiliacs,
comprised approximately 2% or more of AIDS cases.
According to a 1990 U.S. Public Health Service study of
students at 19 colleges, 1 per 200 male and 1 per 5000 female college students were found infected with HIV 65
Infection rates were less than 1 per 1000 at 10 colleges,
and ranged from 0.1% to 1% at the remaining nine sur-

veyed. By 1990, children infected with HIV by infected
parents were seen in growing numbers, from birth to
9 years of age. They comprised 0.3% to 1.4% of AIDS
cases reported .24
PROGRESSION OF HIV INFECTION INTO AIDS
In simple terms, after a prolonged quiet state of 1.5 to
possibly 11 years after infection, the AIDS virus begins
to destroy cells that control the normal immunity of the
body against infections and tumors. At that time, the
body becomes more and more vulnerable to many common viruses and microbes found in our normal environment. Commonly harmless parasites and fungi are
then able to cause severe and often fatal pneumonia or
cerebral infections . 6,54
Upon entering the blood or tissues, HIV can only attach to certain docking sites that it finds projecting from
the surfaces of certain white blood cells. Helper lymphocytes critical to the normal functioning of the immune
system are covered with these sites. Immunologists have
labeled these cells T-helper lymphocytes because the
thymus has an important function in preparing them to
function. The surface attachment sites are termed category
designation four (CD4) glycoprotein antigens. Once attached, virus RNA can enter and infect the lymphocyte .68
The important point is that the cells commonly infected, termed T4 (CD4) helper lymphocytes, are critical to
normal cellular and antibody functions that protect us
against many bacteria, fungi, virus-infected cells, and tumors or cancers. Other cells, such as macrophages, neurologic glial cells, colon/rectal cells, and possibly some
connective tissue cells, also have the CD4 glycoprotein
surface sites to which HIV can attach. Colon cells, for
example in male homosexual interactions, may serve as
infection sites. It is not known whether mucosal cells of
other body cavities may serve as initial infection sites as
well. Various susceptible cells and perhaps cells in the
bone marrow may serve as reservoirs of the virus in a
prolonged latent or quiet incubation stage when HIV
sometimes cannot be detected in the blood . 68
HIV is termed an RNA retrovirus, one that needs complementary deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) formed within
the nucleus of a host cell (termed a provirus form) to reproduce the HIV. As HIV gains entry into the lymphocytes, reverse transcription of viral RNA begins, resulting in formation of double-stranded viral DNA in the
infected cells. Once inserted into the cell's genetic structure (genome), this DNA becomes HIV provirus. HIV
DNA may then divide and reproduce along with the
cell's nuclear DNA for years. Antibody tests are now
available to detect HIV provirus DNA fragments that
regulate production of various parts of HIV structure
(i.e., core proteins, gag; viral envelope, env; reverse transcriptase, pol).3.68
One drug found helpful in prolonging the health of
HIV-infected persons is zidovudine (formerly azidothy-

CHAPTER 8

midine [AZT]). This drug is one of a group of the dideoxy nucleoside drugs that interferes with reverse transcriptase action necessary to complete HIV infection of
human cells .68 Other drugs and combinations of drugs
("cocktails") are currently on the market or being researched that show promise in battling the AIDS virus.
After remaining latent during the prolonged incubation period in infected helper lymphocyte cells, the
HIV commences to replicate. The lymphocytes die, releasing virus into the blood, and thus the numbers of
essential helper lymphocytes are drastically reduced.
When helper cell counts fall below 200 per mm3 in the
blood, many different opportunistic infections and tumors appear. Conditions are such that it becomes increasingly difficult to treat until Pneumocystis infection
of the lungs is fatal, or until HIV or other infection of the
brain causes death. Levels of virus in the blood usually
increase at this time but are still very low compared
with huge viral concentrations of HBV reached in the
blood of patients with HB. 3 At the authors' institution,
patients with T4 helper cell counts of 200 per mm3 or
less may benefit from the protective facilities, nursing
care, and treatment expertise offered by the hospital
dental service clinicians.

SYMPTOMS AND ORAL MANIFESTATIONS
Within 3 months of infection, temporary flulike symptoms of pharyngitis, myalgia, fatigue, fever, or diarrhea
may occur when antibody to HIV becomes detectable.
After prolonged incubation of approximately 1.5 to 11
years, the dentist may detect any of several early signs of
AIDS, signaling gradual failure of the immune system . 6,69
( Refer to Chapter 9 for color illustrations of orofacial
manifestations of AIDS.) Easily detected during examination are one or two cervical lymph nodes, especially
below the mandible, that persist for more than 3 months.
Nodes may be attached and painless, or movable,
painful, and infected. Undifferentiated non-Hodgkins
lymphoma cancers may arise in lymph nodes, or may
appear in the mandible as well as in the central nervous
system, eyes, bone marrow, and other vital organs. 6
Persistent oral candidiasis is often seen with easily dislodged white curdlike patches scattered over the tongue.
In AIDS, such infection may not easily respond to treatment, and often recurs, developing into atrophic candidiasis, or cheilitis at the angles of the lips. Painful herpes stomatitis is also somewhat common. Untreated
herpes or candidiasis may extend into esophagitis or
laryngitis, impairing speech . 6
Red, brownish-to-purple blotches that persist on the
oral mucosa and skin of the individual typify a sarcoma
of the capillaries, termed Kaposi's sarcoma. Oral lesions
often develop into tumors that may require surgery and
radiation therapy. Kaposi s sarcoma is often found on oral
tissues of male homosexuals. Human papilloma virus can
cause flat to cauliflower-like oral warts to develop . 6

I nfection Control

A persistent, severe, recurrent gingivitis and periodontitis typical of AIDS is a common finding that brings patients for dental care. The gingivitis may persist despite
good plaque control .69
Early systemic signs of illness progressing toward
AIDS are marked by weight loss of up to 50 pounds
within a few months, and chronic fever or night sweats
that persist for 3 months or more .6 "Early detection, and
medical treatment of HIV infection is beneficial to the
majority of patients. Current treatments are summarized
in the annual Journal of the American Dental Association
supplement update, Facts about AIDS for the Dentist.

SEROLOGY OF HIV INFECTION
HIV infection is detected by blood tests (enzyme-linked
immunoassay [EIA], Western Blot, and fluorescent antibody tests) that detect antibodies formed against the
virus. Tests for anti-HIV antibody are often positive
within 3 months after infection; most are positive by
6 months; 1% take up to 12 months to become positive.
A second positive test is necessary to confirm positive
serologies.
Serologic tests for the virus and provirus DNA also
have been developed. Tests for T4/T8 (or CD4/CD8)
lymphocyte ratios are used to indicate progress of the
HIV infection. One criterion for starting zidovudine therapy is a T4 helper cell count below 500 per mm 3 of blood .6

HIV RISKS FOR CLINICAL PERSONNEL
Of all American health care workers injured by needles
and sharp instruments used to treat HIV-infected persons, only 0.3% or less have become infected with HIV
This contrasts with 30% of workers who become infected with HB following parenteral exposure to infected blood. 29 Among all U.S. health care personnel,
documented occupationally related HIV infections now
total 54. (None were established among dental personnel). 18,20,21 An additional 134 HIV infections are considered possible occupational transmissions (including six
in dental personnel).
As was pointed out in the introduction, dental personnel have almost miraculously been spared infection
with HIV Thousands of unprotected dentists who unknowingly treated HIV-infected patients must have
been exposed to HIV infection as the epidemic mounted
during the 1980s before gloves and other barriers came
into common use. Only six dentists who claim no other
exposure risks appear to have acquired HIV infection by
occupational exposure. 18,20,21,29 Testing for evidence of
prior HIV infection at the time of exposure was not commonly performed in dentistry until the 1990s. Because
none of the infected dentists had such baseline blood
tests, their HIV infections cannot be firmly linked to
time and circumstance of clinical exposure.
HIV infection has developed in a nurse and a technician spattered with HIV infected blood. Five other

CHAPTER 8

I nfection Control

medical personnel have acquired HIV infection related
to spatter of infected blood to their nonintact skin. The
serologic status for HIV in these persons was apparently
not known when they were exposed. 18,20,21,29 Therefore
personnel are required to protect eyes, mucosa, skin, and
hands from spatter and direct contact with blood and bloodcontaminated body fluids during dental treatments of all patients. 122 Precautions also must be made to minimize risks of
injuries with sharp instrumentation.
Patients seriously ill enough with AIDS to be seen in
a hospital setting also may harbor transmissible respiratory infections, such as TB and cytomegalovirus (CMV)
infection . As indicated in the section Epidemiology
of Other Infection Risks, transmission of drug-resistant
TB from immunocompromised patients is a growing
concern. Personnel without adequate barrier protection
should avoid exposure to coughing, saliva-spatter, and
heavy aerosols from HIV-infected persons with signs of
respiratory infection. This applies especially to pregnant
women, since CMV can be detrimental to the newborn
infant of a mother recently infected with CMV CMV is
also bloodborne.
HIV RISKS FOR DENTAL PATIENTS
With proper use of IC measures in dental practice, the risk for
a dental patient of contracting HIV from office personnel or
from other patients is extremely low. HIV has not been
transmitted to dental patients from infected clinical personnel anywhere in the United States, with the exception
In a circumstance that has
of one unique outbreak .
been unique through 1999, a group of six patients was
found to be infected with the same strain of HIV that infected the Florida dentist who treated them .20-25, 37 The
patients had no other apparent source of exposure other
than the dentist who persisted in treating patients while
having symptoms of well-developed AIDS. Use of adequate IC measures was questionable. Therefore some
kind of doctor-to-patient transmission seems likely. At
this time, no other instances of patients being infected
with HIV by infected dentists or physicians have been
reported. One or more alleged HIV cross-infections between patients attributed to contaminated dental equipment have come under investigation . 21
HIV DATA RELATED TO INFECTION CONTROL
Data that provide a better understanding of disease
agents, their survival qualities, and clinical transmission
potentials help us institute effective IC. The following
HIV data are somewhat reassuring and help explain the
amazingly low occupational risk of HIV infection for
dental personnel . 6,76
1. Unlike HB virus, HIV usually has been found in very
low levels in blood of infected persons. This is especially true of asymptomatic persons who are the most

difficult to recognize and would be most likely to be
treated in private offices .
2. HIV was detected in only 28 of 50 samples of blood
from infected persons. In saliva from infected persons,
HIV was detectable in only 1 of 83 samples . 63 Counts
of virus per milliliter of blood fluctuate, but may increase as antibody to HIV core protein declines . 3,77
3. In dried infected blood, 99% of HIV has been found
by CDC investigators to be inactive in approximately
90 minutes. Longer survival data on larger numbers
of HIV grown in laboratory cell cultures have created
false impressions about HIV survival in dried infected blood. However, when kept wet, the virus may
survive for 2 or more days . 112 Caution is required
with containers of used needles in which the virus
may remain wet.
4. HIV is killed by all methods of sterilization. When
used properly, all disinfectants except some quaternary ammonium compounds are said to inactivate
HIV in less than 2 minutes. 6,30,119
5. HIV has been transmitted by blood-contaminated
fluids that have been heavily spattered or splashed .25
However, aerosols, such as those produced during
dental treatments, have not been found to transmit
FIB or HIV infection . 30,100
6. Barriers have proven successful in protecting dental
personnel in hospital dentistry and in all other dental
clinics against HIV and even more transmissible viral
infections at the authors' institution for over 10 years.
A recent concern for the immunocompromised person,
as well as for dental personnel, is airborne transmission
of multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis 5-22,26
VIRAL HEPATITIS: AGENTS,
EPIDEMIOLOGY, AND INFECTION
In the 8 years after AIDS was recognized, 38,000 persons
developed the disease. During that same period, an esti mated 38,400 persons died from HB, related cirrhosis,
or liver carcinoma. 24,33,36
Infective inflammation of the liver, termed hepatitis,
can be caused by infection with five varieties of hepatitis viruses labeled A to E. The type of infection is specifically diagnosed by serologic testing. A, B, and C types
of hepatitis are roughly equally divided among viral
hepatitis cases detected in population surveys, with
type A being the most prevalent. Types B, C, and D are
bloodborne infections. Types A and E are fecal-borne infections . A new bloodborne virus, hepatitis G, has
been detected in a group of high-risk hospitalized dental patients who had liver disease that was associated
with other viral agents or conditions."' Its importance
and contribution to liver disease is not clear.
HB is found in 1 of 100 to 1 of 500 persons in the general population, including dental patients. Incidence has

CHAPTER

peaked in areas in association with high rates of intravenous (IV) drug abuse and closely follows the incidence
of HIV infection . 28,43,44
According to a 1998 CDC report, I in 55 persons (1.8%)
in the U.S. population may carry type C hepatitis . 19,' 8,97
Type C accounts for one third of liver transplants and
over 8000 deaths per year. 19
VIRAL HEPATITIS INFECTION, SYMPTOMS,
AND CLINICAL FINDINGS

HBV must enter the circulating blood to reach the liver
where the viral DNA causes infected hepatic cells to reproduce the virus. Symptoms usually appear after 2 to
4 months of incubation. Extensive liver damage and illness occur rapidly in approximately 2 of 10 infected persons. Symptoms and signs include nausea, vomiting,
chronic fatigue, mental depression, fever, joint aches,
darkened urine, jaundice, elevated liver enzymes, and
possibly diarrhea or rash. Mortality is 2% or less, but
tends to be 2% or higher in persons over 30 years of
age .35,43 ( CMV and Epstein-Barr virus [EBV] infections
also may produce jaundice and elevated liver enzymes.)
Only 2 of 10 persons infected with HB show symptoms.
The remaining eight persons are usually unaware of their
infection. For this reason, it is impossible to detect most
HB-infected persons by medical history. Whether infected
persons are symptomatic or not, they can transmit HB.
Usually within 1 year, 9 of the 10 persons develop immunity to HB and are no longer infectious. Unfortunately,
1 of 10 infected persons remains infected and infectious,
often for the remainder of life. Acute cirrhosis may be fatal within a number of months. If illness was not severe
and chronic infection persists, in 20 to 30 years increased
risks of cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma may prove
fatal. The possibility of such an outcome produces an
overall hepatitis mortality rate of 2%. There is no specific
treatment against the virus after infection occurs.
Other types of hepatitis produce symptoms somewhat similar to those of HB . 33,43,44,78 Type A has a shorter
incubation of approximately 1 month, with lower mortality. Persons infected with type A do not remain infected or infectious beyond 8 weeks after symptoms
subside. Type C hepatitis is often (75%) anicteric (without jaundice), being detected by an elevation of liver enzymes and serologic tests. Type C hepatitis becomes
chronic in 75% to 85% of persons infected, causing them
to remain infectious. 19
Type D, or delta hepatitis virus, has a curious
makeup. It has no outer coating and relies upon cells infected with HBV to provide the required outer layer.
Once types B and D infect a person together, usually by
the same route and source, the infection becomes much
more severe and many times more fatal than infection
with HB alone. Protection against HB also protects
against type D, but not types A, C, or E.33,36,78

8

I nfection Control

TRANSMISSION OF VIRAL HEPATITIS

The transmission of viral hepatitis types B, C, and D is
mainly by blood, IV drug abuse, and sexual contact. Up
to billions of HBV may occur per milliliter of infectious
blood." HBV is also found in saliva at lower concentrations. HB can be transmitted by contamination of broken
skin, the mouth, or eyes with blood-contaminated saliva.
One in three exposed persons may be infected with HB.
In studies performed during dental treatments of HBVinfected persons, aerosolization of HBV could not be detected by tests for HB surface antigen.'°°
HB is transmitted in the population by the same
routes as HIV infection. Unlike HIV, however, HBV
has been transmitted to family members by prolonged
associations that may involve repeated saliva or blood
contamination (e.g., by shared shaving utensils, traces
of blood left on bathroom towels, or perhaps extensive sharing of unwashed tooth brushes, or by drinking after one another). In public, however, neither HIV
nor HBV are transmitted by casual contact."," Persons
with risks for HIV infection are also more likely to be
carriers of HBV Up to 90% of HIV-infected persons
have been infected with HBV Mothers infected with
HBV have nearly a 50% chance of infecting their infants at birth. If a mother's infection is recognized, infants can be easily and safely protected with antiserum at birth. If not, up to 90% of infected infants
remain carriers for life and have the same increased
risk of fatal liver cancer or cirrhosis in 20 to 30 years
as adult carriers.
Hepatitis A is excreted from the infected liver into the
bile. Both hepatitis A and E are transmitted by the fecaloral route. Poor hygiene and contaminated food and
water are common routes of infection. These types are
not a major concern in dentistry.
Blood transfusions were a major source of type B hepatitis until 1985 and of type C hepatitis until 1991. A test
for type C hepatitis was developed in 1990. Testing instituted in hospitals since 1986 for type B and since 1991
for hepatitis C has virtually eliminated transfusions as
a source of infections. A remaining problem is to detect
infectious donors during incubation. .
I NFECTION RISKS FOR PERSONNEL FROM
HEPATITIS B AND C VIRUSES

Personnel can be infected by parenteral exposure; mucosal exposure to infected blood or blood-contaminated
saliva; and by spatter of blood contamination to eyes,
mouth, or broken skin .29 Paper cuts from blood contaminated request forms appear to have transmitted HB. 99
Plain saliva also can be weakly infectious. Aerosolized,
blood-contaminated saliva and respiratory secretions
that can transmit many respiratory infection viruses
and tuberculosis have not been shown to transmit
HB . 12,26,33,42,82

CHAPTER 8

I nfection Control

One in three parenteral exposures of nonvaccinated
personnel to HB-infected blood has resulted in HB infection. 43 In contrast to the 1 of 300 nonvaccinated persons who develop HIV following parenteral exposure to
HIV infected blood, 100 of 300 persons parenterally exposed to HBV will develop HB.
With a 2% mortality rate for HB, 2 of 100 HBV exposed
persons may die, compared with 1 of 300 HIV-exposed
persons. Thus a parenteral blood exposure of a nonimmune person to HBV carries at least twice the mortality
risk of a similar HIV exposure. This mortality risk from
HB infection could be 6.6 times that of HIV exposure
when studies are compared that showed only 1 of 1000
HIV infections per HIV exposure. This latter figure may
more closely relate to HIV exposures in dentistry.
Fortunately, a vaccine is readily available against HBV
Mortality rates for personnel from HB exposure could
approach zero . 33 Patient protection still depends on effective use of IC procedures.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) exposure risks for personnel
have been documented and appear to be low. IC should
minimize risks. Data indicate infection rates from parenteral exposure with HCV-infected blood to be between
the rates for HB and HIV infection-approximately 6 of
300 persons parenterally exposed to HCV infected
blood, or 1 of 50.

SEROLOGIC TESTS RELATED
TO HEPATITIS A, B, AND C
Serologic tests are available for several antigens of HBV
and for the serum antibodies individuals produce against
them.
Testing a blood sample for hepatitis B surface
antigen (HbsAg) is used to determine the presence of infection by detecting the protein associated with the surface of the HB virus in the blood. The test is used to detect
persons who are infected, whether they are symptomatic
or not. Testing for HB e antigen (HBeAg) determines
presence of an HB antigen found in blood when HB virus
concentrations are high and relate to the person's ability
to infect others.
Testing for anti-HBc (antibody against HB core antigen) can detect antibody against a virus core protein that
becomes positive in virtually all persons a few months
after infection and remains positive for years thereafter.
The antibody is used as a marker for previous HB infection, but this antibody is not protective.
A test for anti-HBs (anti-HB surface antigen) is performed to determine the presence of antibodies that can
protect against future HB infection. Detection of antiHBs means that the person has been infected and has recovered or has been immunized with a vaccine.
Hepatitis A virus (HAV) is detected by a test for antiHAV antibody. Recent infection is indicated by an immunoglobulin M class of anti-HAV antibody. An antiHCV test and a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for
HCV-RNA are available for testing patients and clinical

personnel. 19 Blood for transfusion and other blood products are now screened for type C hepatitis.
A test for anti-hepatitis D virus can detect superinfection with hepatitis D in persons infected with HB infection." Testing would be especially indicated when the
infection appears to be severe and progressing rapidly.

DATA RELATED TO CONTROL OF HEPATITIS B
HBV is a relatively stable DNA hydrophilic virus that
can withstand drying on surfaces, and presumably upon
equipment and clothing, for over 7 days." Up to 1 billion virus particles of HBV can be found per milliliter of
infected blood. Disinfectants selected for their ability to
inactivate TB and hydrophilic viruses appear able to inactivate HBV 15 -57 All forms of sterilization destroy the
virus . 31,57

I MMUNIZATION AGAINST
HEPATITIS A, B, AND C
A vaccine against type A hepatitis has been developed
and found effective and is recommended for the dentist,
dental student, and auxiliary personnel clinical trials 91,103
HAVRIX vaccine (Smith Kline Beecham Biologicals) and
VAOTA vaccine (Merck & Co., Inc.) are available. Type
B hepatitis is effectively prevented by either of two genetically engineered vaccines now derived from bread
yeast, Engerix-B (Smith Kline and French Laboratories)
The
and Recombivax B (Merck Sharp and Dohme).
antigenic protein of these genetically engineered vaccines is identical to the purified viral surface protein
antigen used in the original "killed" vaccine derived
from the serum of HB-infected persons.
Vaccination against HBV requires one dose followed
with another, 1 month later, and a third dose 6 months
after the first. Hepatitis vaccines must be given in the
arm, not the hip. Both vaccines (yeast and human derived) have as few or fewer side effects compared to
other injected vaccines. Protection of those who form
antibodies is virtually 100%. One in 30 persons vaccinated may not respond to the vaccine. Follow-up testing
is recommended to confirm immunity 1 month after immunization is completed because dental personnel are
considered at high risk for HB infection . Protective
i mmunoglobulin is available for HBV-exposed persons
who have no immunity.
No vaccine is available against hepatitis C. Because
the virus mutates rapidly in infected persons, a vaccine
may be difficult or impossible to develop. Nor is a protective immunoglobulin available for exposed persons. 19

TESTS FOR HEPATITIS B ANTIBODY
AND BOOSTERS
Persons with a history of exposure to HB and those who
have worked in dentistry for several years may prefer to
be tested for anti-HBs before being immunized to see if
they need the vaccine. A test for antigen (HBsAg) is use-

CHAPTER 8

ful to detect an asymptomatic carrier (chronically infected) state. Persons who are carriers (HBsAg positive)
cannot produce antibody, and they would want to test
family contacts and immunize those not already exposed.
After a period of 1 to 6 months after vaccination
against HB is completed, it is important that dental personnel (as high-risk persons) obtain a test to determine if
protective anti-HB surface antigen antibodies (anti-HBs)
were formed .28,33 One or more in 30 vaccinated adults under 40 years of age may not respond to three vaccine injections. Still higher percentages of persons over 40 years
do not respond because the immune response gradually
lessens with age .33
Three or more years after vaccination, many dental
personnel realize that they have never had a follow-up
antibody test. Usually their antibody level is often undetectable by then, and their ability to respond cannot
be evaluated without a booster. Many prefer to save the
cost of an initial test by getting a booster dose and a test
a month later.
Routine boosters are not recommended for the general health care profession during the first 6 to 9 years
after immunization. 23,33,72,81,123 A booster effect is usually
experienced upon infection in a person who has produced antibodies. Because of the crisis situation that can
surround an exposure, the time it takes to obtain test
results after an exposure, and the problem in dentistry
of often never knowing when a small exposure has occurred, dental personnel often prefer to have their blood
tested with a radioimmunoassay test for anti-HBs to
check immunity. If test results are below 10 serum ratio
units, they should take a booster dose of HB antigen.
This is in keeping with the recommendation for having
a booster dose when a known exposure occurs and antibody in a previously immunized person is deficient .33

EPIDEMIOLOGY OF OTHER
I NFECTION RISKS
Agencies are concerned that dental personnel and patients are protected against risks of all infections borne
by blood, saliva, and respiratory secretions. Routine
medical histories are important, but cannot be relied
upon to detect infected patients or for selective use of
"universal precautions" for individual patients. All patients must be considered infectious. In addition to HIV and
hepatitis B, C, and D (discussed previously), other
transmissible infections of concern include infectious
mononucleosis (EBV infection), CMV, herpes simplex I
and II, and tuberculosis. 27,38,60,71 Without barrier protection, hands and mucosa of eyes and mouth of treatment
personnel are especially vulnerable to infection with her
pes viruses. 12,49,89,90,129 Agents of measles, mumps, other
childhood infections, and some other respiratory infections also are transmissible, especially in indistinguishable early stages of infection . 0 Measles and mumps
can be severe in adults. (See Chapter 9, Patient Assess-

I nfection Control

ment, Plate 9-1, showing oral manifestations associated
with communicable diseases.)
In 1990,23% of measles infections occurred in persons
over 19 years of age. The mortality rate was 0.3%; one
third of fatal cases involved nonimmunized adults .27
Measles outbreaks among college students have been
severe. 32
Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) bacteria
are an increasing concern .22 They are resistant to two or
more of the more common therapeutic drugs and are
highly transmissible by aerosols produced by coughing.
Infections seldom become active in healthy adults, but
an active infection can remove a clinical person from
practice for months until the infection is controlled and
is no longer transmissible. Infection with MDR-TB can
be rapidly fatal for immunocompromised persons .22
The least familiar disease is CMV infection, a sexually
and blood-transmitted disease that often resembles infectious mononucleosis. Especially during pregnancy, a
newly infected woman is faced with possible intrauterine or perinatal infection of her infant. Developmental
defects can occur in 5% to 10% of infected infants resulting in neuromuscular, auditory, and visual impairments." This is just another infection to which operatory personnel are vulnerable, but it can be prevented
by universal use of barrier protection.
Personnel should avail themselves to immunizations
against measles, polio, and tetanus. Annual or semiannual skin tests for tuberculosis (PPD) are urged and may
soon be required for dental personnel. HB immunization is a federal OSHA requirement unless an employee
documents his or her understanding of the risks and his
or her refusal. Current regulations require employers to
pay for HB immunization, but not for confirmatory testing a month after immunization is complete. Employers
or workmen's compensation must pay for serologic testing of employees following exposure incidents related
to HIV and HBV Measles vaccination is required for
persons born after 1956, or they must show proof of immunity for admission to most colleges .34 This is also an
excellent requirement for dental personnel.
I mmunization against viral influenza and pneumococcal pneumonia may be elected and are advisable.
Mumps immunization is highly desirable for male and
female personnel who lack a history of immunization or
childhood infection. Diphtheria and pertussis immunizations usually are obtained during infancy. Vaccines
to prevent HIV, HCV, and other common infections may
still be developed in years to come. 19

EXPOSURE ASSESSMENT
PROTOCOL
OSHA does not regulate students. However, dental students are required to follow the same exposure protocol
incident plan as dental employees, but with any appropriate differences for students such as source of medical

CHAPTER 8

I nfection Control

care. This plan requires that if blood-contaminated
body fluid from a patient is spattered to mucous membranes or comes into contact with the broken or punctured skin of a clinical person, or if exposure is produced
by cut or puncture with a contaminated sharp instrument, the protocol must be followed immediately before
the patient leaves. If possible, the patient's potential to
transmit hepatitis B, C, and HIV infection is determined
and the student's susceptibility to HB is determined. The
attending physician who helps with these determinations then provides, if indicated, HB immunoglobulin,
hepatitis booster, anti-HIV testing, and counseling (see
OSHA Regulation).
MEDICAL HISTORY

The medical history serves the following purposes:
(1) to detect any unrecognized illness that requires medical diagnosis and care; (2) to identify any infection or
high risk that may be important to a clinical person exposed during examination, treatment, or cleanup procedures; (3) to assist in managing and caring for infected
patients; and (4) to reinforce use of adequate IC procedures, bearing in mind that general history taking is
not capable of detecting all infectious persons. Only conscientious use of universal precautions provides safety.
Symptoms of persistent respiratory illness, night sweats,
chronic fatigue, and weight loss can be symptomatic of
either tuberculosis or HIV infection. With increasing occurrence of MDR-TB bacteria, a dentist's medical history of HIV-infected dental patients and others at high
risk should be kept abreast of any current medical care
and surveillance from the patient's physician. Be aware
of the relationship of all infections (and their characteristics) when taking a medical history and performing an
initial general examination at each appointment. (Refer
to Chapter 9 for more detail.)
PERSONAL BARRIER PROTECTION

Gloves. OSHA regulations specify that all clinical
personnel must wear treatment gloves during all treatment procedures. After each appointment, or if a leak is
detected, remove gloves, wash hands, and put on fresh
gloves (see Figs. 8-5 and 8-6). Gloves must not be washed
or used for more than one patient. Inexpensive disposable well-fitting treatment gloves are available for chairside use. They should be dispensed carefully to avoid
contaminating others in the box. The value of gloves
was emphasized by finding that without gloves, occult
blood persisted under dentists' fingernails for several
days after patient contact . 4 Gloves also help prevent
very painful and transmissible herpetic infections to fingers (Whitlow) and hands .
Treatment gloves cannot protect against punctures.
Gloves that become penetrated or torn can imbibe patient fluids and therefore should be removed and the
hands washed. Instead of acting as a barrier, gloves

worn for more than one patient or for prolonged periods can harbor blood and saliva-borne microorganisms.
Gloves must not be washed with hand soaps. Washing
reduces glove integrity, leaving personnel more vulnerable. Instead of attempting to wash gloved hands before
opening drawers or handling items adjacent to the operatory, use tongs, a paper towel, or a food handler's
overglove to prevent contamination.
Dental personnel with chronic HBV or HIV infection
should curtail any treatment activities that would jeopardize the patient. All personnel with weeping or draining
lesions that could infect patients should abstain from patient
contact. 23 Dry, nondraining lesions should be kept well

protected from clinical contamination.
Increased marketing competition has reduced glove
prices and improved quality of latex treatment gloves
appreciably. Viruses have been found to penetrate no
more than one intact latex glove out of 100.'4 Gloves
must meet new Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
regulations: less than 4% can have a leak detectable by a
water test. Some companies set their standards at less
than 2% to 3%. Store boxes of gloves out of sunlight and
store multiple boxes in tightly closed, heavy plastic bags
to minimize oxidation. If in doubt about a supplier's
gloves, contact the distributor about FDA regulations
and manufacturing standards of the product. Products
that do not meet FDA standards and advertising claims
are subject to removal from the market if consumers report lack of compliance.
While cleaning and sorting used sharp instruments,
wear puncture-resistant utility gloves. Nitrile latex gloves
are preferred; they can be washed inside and out, disinfected, or steam autoclaved, as needed. Wear treatment
gloves inside the heavy gloves if they must be shared.
With the advent of wearing latex gloves for several
hours each day, dental personnel should be aware that
the possibility of latex allergy or hypersensitivity is a
growing concern for all dental health care workers as
well as for patients. In July 1991, the U.S. FDA requested
that all cases of allergic reactions to latex be reported.
The concern among dental health care workers is due to
the frequent changes of gloves, which exposes them to
the latex protein allergens. The symptoms associated
with latex allergy or hypersensitivity should not be confused with the physical irritation caused by handwashing. Currently, there is no cure for latex allergy. Avoidance of latex products is the best treatment.
I nstructions for Handwashing. At the beginning of
a routine treatment period, remove watches, jewelry,
and rings, or at least those with enlarged projections or
stones that can penetrate gloves; then wash hands with
a suitable cleanser. Lather hands for at least 10 seconds,
rubbing all surfaces, and rinse. Use a clean brush to scrub
under and around nails. Repeat at least once to remove
all soil. Washing hands well when changing gloves is required.
Even good quality surgical gloves develop

CHAPTER

minor pinholes or leaks during vigorous use. Washing
minimizes infection risks due to leakage. Before surgery
use a prescribed surgical scrub, washing and rinsing
from hands toward elbows. (Reserve a separate brush to
clean instruments.)
Hand cleansers containing a mild antiseptic like 3%
PCMX (p-chloro, meta-xylenole) or chlorhexidine are
preferred to control transient pathogens and to suppress
overgrowth of skin bacteria. Hand cleansers with 4%
chlorhexidine may have broader activity for special
cleansing (e.g., for surgery, when a glove leaks, or when
a clinical person experiences an injury), but they can be
hazardous to eyes.", "' PCMX cleansers have been found
equally effective, nonirritating, and preferable for routine use."" Newer nonopaque chlorhexidine products
used especially for surgical scrubs may be less irritating
to the hands of some individuals upon prolonged use .48
Protective Eyewear, Masks, and Hair Protection.

Protective eyewear may consist of goggles, or glasses
with solid side-shields. Wear a mask to protect against
aerosols. Face shields are appropriate for heavy spatter,
but a mask is still required to protect against aerosols
that drift behind the shield. Spatter also can pass under the edge of a short shield and strike the mouth. Antifog solution for eyewear can be obtained from opticians or product distributors.
Put on eyewear with clean hands before gloving, and
remove it with clean hands after gloves are removed.
Grasp eyewear by the temple pieces. Grasp the mask only
by the string or band at the sides or back of the head to remove it (Fig. 8-7). Change the mask between every patient or
whenever it becomes moist or visibly soiled. Discard the mask
when the patient is dismissed after treatment instead of
wearing it around the neck where contaminated edges
can rub against the neck. Avoid touching facewear during
treatments to avoid cross-contamination.
When eyewear or shields are removed they should be
cleaned and disinfected. (To save time, have clean replacement eyewear available while disinfecting used
eyewear.) Remove eyewear by grasping the temple
pieces with clean fingers; place eyewear on a paper
towel and spray with a water-based disinfectant that is
allowed to stand for at least 5 minutes. Next, while
wearing gloves (for protection against any contamination on lenses), wash eyewear well, and reapply disinfectant for 10 minutes, or preferably allow it to soak in
a 1:50 to 1:100 solution of 5% hypochlorite bleach, or
other disinfectant solution that does not damage eyewear. (One-half ounce of bleach in a quart of water provides an acceptable 1:65 dilution.) Rinse well and dry.
If preferred, goggles that can be autoclaved are available from dental distributors.
Masks with the highest filtration are rectangular,
folded types used for surgeries. 40 Dome-shaped masks
are adequate barriers against spatter and are considered
to prevent HB and HIV infection.
They are not ade-

8

I nfection Control

quate to hold back measles, influenza, and other aerosolborne respiratory viruses or tuberculosis bacteria. To
best protect against aerosols, press edges of the rectangular mask close around the bridge of the nose and face.
Masks have been rated according to porosity and effectiveness." Consult claims and test data of mask manufacturers and compare before choosing a mask.
Hair should be kept back out of the treatment field.
Hair can trap heavy contamination that, if not washed
away, can be rubbed back from a pillow onto the face at
night. Personnel must protect their hair with a surgical
cap when encountering heavy spatter (e.g., from an ultrasonic scaling device).
Protective Overgarments. An overgarment must be
protective of clothing and skin (see Fig. 8-4). Used overgarments should require a minimum of handling and
should be easily laundered. Overgarments must be changed
whenever becoming moist or visibly soiled. Operatory clothing becomes highly spattered with invisible saliva and
traces of blood throughout the day. HB and many other
microbes can live on dry materials for 1 or more
days. 16,61,71,120 Spatter is heavy to the upper surface of the
wrists and forearms. Spatter remains on uncovered
arms most of the day if not protected by long sleeves.
Large cuffs of clinic coat sleeves drag across patient napkins and mouths, become grossly contaminated, and
cross-contaminate patients."' Therefore sleeves with
knit cuffs that tuck under gloves are preferred. If not
covered, arms must be washed after each patient if spatter was created. Most office sinks are not deep or wide
enough for effective, routine arm washing.
A simple, lightweight garment that covers the arms
and chest up to the neck as well as the lap when seated
appears to provide adequate protection. Cloth made of
cotton or cotton/ synthetic fiber like an isolation garment material appears to be thick enough to protect skin

FIG 8-7

Remove the mask as shown. Grasp the mask ties or
elastic band behind the head instead of grasping the contami nated mask. Before treatment, put on mask and eyewear before washing and gloving hands. After treatment, remove
gloves, then eyewear and mask, and wash hands.

CHAPTER 8

I nfection Control

and street clothing from the spatter of most dental treatments. If surgeries or other treatments produce splashing that wets or penetrates a garment, change it as soon
as possible, and clean the skin.
Wearing contaminated garments home or out of the clinical area should not occur. Such garments can contaminate
family members who sort, handle, and launder soiled
clothing, or may infect young children who cling to
adults' clothing. Contamination with HBV, TB, and respiratory viruses (e.g., respiratory syncytial virus) are of
most concern.
Used overgarments are removed and placed directly
into a laundry bag with a minimum of handling or sorting before leaving the clinical area. Guidelines call for
managing used clinic garments to avoid handling or
sorting (e.g., searching pockets, removing name tags).
Persons handling soiled clinical garments must wear
protective gloves. Laundering must be provided by the
employer.
Laundering with a regular cycle with regular laundry
detergent is considered acceptable, following manufacturer's directions. Hot water up to 70'C or cool water containing 50 to 150 ppm of chlorine provided by
liquid laundry bleach would provide more antimicrobial action. Use of a hot air dryer and/or ironing is also
beneficial.28,64
DISPOSAL OF CLINICAL WASTE
Infected blood and other liquid clinical waste generally
can be poured down a sanitary sewer or drain designated for that purpose, but not mercury, silver, or other
heavy metal chemicals. Aseptic precautions, cleaning,
and disinfection must be applied to the basin around
the drain. Adding 3 ounces of 5% hypochlorite in water
(household bleach) to each 30 ounces of fluid collected
in surgical aspiration bottles is recommended before
disposing the fluid down the drain.
Contaminated materials such as used masks, gloves,
blood/saliva-soaked sponges, cotton rolls, and so on,
must be discarded safely. OSHA regulations presented
previously describe rules and required labels regarding
regulated sharps and soft waste disposal. OSHA labeling
requirements may differ from local protection agency requirements. As pathologic waste, excised tissues require
separate disposal and may not be discarded into the
trash.
Federal EPA and local environmental protection or
control agencies regulate the management and disposal
of blood-contaminated waste. This usually applies to
waste when it leaves the dental office or clinic. Local
county and state regulations must be consulted.
Judgment is essential in bagging medical waste so inj ury or direct contact with liquids does not take place
because HIV and HBV can survive beyond a few days
while wet. Separating needles and sharps into hardwalled, leak-proof, and sealable containers and out of

soft trash has provided adequate safety. Nevertheless,
local laws governing waste disposal range from the adequate recommendations of the CDC to regulations requiring more strict management and tracking of waste
disposal, usually at an added expense . Consult local
city, county, and state regulations.
NEEDLE DISPOSAL
Goals for needle disposal are to: (1) dispose of needles in
a hard-walled, leakproof, and sealable container, which
has the OSHA biohazard label; (2) locate the needledisposal container in the operatory close to where the
needle will be used; and (3) avoid carrying unsheathed
contaminated needles or containers in a manner that
could endanger others or would allow the needles to be
accidentally spilled (see Chapter 10). 95 If numbers of approved disposal containers are limited, move the wellclosed container to where it is needed during cleanup.
Follow local regulations for disposal of the container.
PRECAUTIONS TO AVOID INJURY EXPOSURE
Pointed instruments without a hollow lumen have minimal capacity to transmit infected blood into a puncture
site. However, the same principles that apply to needles
should be reasonably translated and applied to used
burs, wires, and sharp instruments from the operatory.
Use great care in passing instruments and syringes with
unsheathed needles to another person. Turn sharp and
curved ends away from the recipient's hand.
Two-handed resheathing of needles is not permitted.
A needle sheath holder or other safety device or technique should be used for the operator to resheath the
needle with only one hand (see Chapter 10). 95
Remove burs from handpieces when finished, or if
left in the handpiece in a hanger, point the bur away
from your hands and body. Hanging handpieces upside
down in some types of hangers can angle the bur away
from the operator. Carefully and deliberately rehang a handpiece when a cutting instrument must be left in it.
OVERVIEW OF
ASEPTIC TECHNIQUES
The concept of asepsis is to prevent cross-contamination-all items that are touched with saliva-coated
hands must be rendered free of contamination before
treating the next patient. These contaminated items can
be discarded; protected by disposable covers; or removed, cleaned, and sterilized. Do not directly touch
what you do not want to contaminate. A few simple
rules help avoid wasting costly time and effort between
patient appointments.
During each appointment:
1. Remember, whatever is touched is contaminated.
2. Directly touch only what has to be touched (anticipate
your needs).

CHAPTER

3. Use one of the following to control contamination:
A. Clean and sterilize it.
B. Protect surfaces and equipment that are not sterilized with disposable, single-use covers (barriers). Discard them after every appointment. Use
disposable covers on portable items (e.g., curing
lamp handles, amalgam mixers, and plastic airwater syringe tips).
C. Use a paper towel, tongs, or plastic baggie over
gloves to briefly handle equipment or to open
cabinets and drawers to get things not anticipated
during setup.
D. Scrub and disinfect noncritical surfaces as well as
possible. These include any countertops that cannot be covered (and may collect aerosols or spatter) or things that may be accidentally touched,
such as room door handles and light switches.
With practice, these areas should not become
contaminated.
When consistently practiced, these concepts of
asepsis can reduce exposure risks, reduce cross-infection risks, and reduce cleaning and disinfecting numerous items in the operatory between appointments. Good asepsis practice also will reduce or
eliminate the need to clean or disinfect nonoperatory
areas of the dental office because office personnel will
avoid contaminating these areas. Examples of items
found contaminated in studies of dental offices include telephones, faucet handles, switches, cabinet
and drawer handles, radiography controls, lamp handles, door handles, charts, and pens. Evidence of potential cross-contamination and cross-infection risks
for patients and personnel related to contact with
contaminated surfaces was presented in the chapter
introduction .

FIG 8-8

Protect charts from contamination. When charting
must be performed without help, rest your writing hand on a
paper towel and cover the pen. Note that cuff of the glove
should overlap cloth overgarment. Surfaces of both glove and
plastic bag must not contaminate the chart and its contents.

8

I nfection Control

With treatment-soiled gloves, avoid unnecessary contact with all switches, drawers, dispensers, or surfaces
on the unit that need not be touched. Use the wrist, arm,
or paper towel to operate faucet handles and soap dispenser handles. Use a paper towel to handle the phone,
drawer pulls, and charts, and a tongue blade to operate
uncovered switches. Rest your gloved writing hand on
a paper towel when it is necessary to record findings
while charting a patient. Pull a slender clear bag over a
pen, tip first, then pop the tip through the plastic end,
and tie the bag snugly in a knot at the other end; discard
the bag between patients (Fig. 8-8).
Use single-use plastic bags on control unit and chair
back, foil or plastic "baggies" on lamp handles, and adherent plastic sheets or a plastic bag on the radiography
cone (Fig. 8-9). Use a thin plastic overglove, or a gauze or
paper towel to avoid contaminating other objects. Use
foot controls for faucets, dental chair, and radiography
button. In addition, cover light-curing units and amalgamators
with custom fitting plastic barriers to avoid contamination.
Once a day, or as needed, use any water-based tuberculocidal disinfectant licensed by the EPA to clean and
disinfect other environmental surfaces in the operatory
and laboratory.
OPERATORY ASEPSIS

Protection of Operatory Surfaces: Rationale, Materials, and Methods. Operatory surfaces that will be
repeatedly touched or soiled are best protected with disposable covers (barriers) that can be discarded after
each treatment (see Fig. 8-9).
Changing covers
eliminates cleaning and disinfecting the surface; saves
ti me, effort, and expense; and can be more protective.
White paper sheets ("white newsprint") are useful for
workbenches and operatory surfaces on which dry contaminated materials are placed. For dental unit trays,

FIG 8-9

Specially designed or generic plastic bags are used to
cover the chair and unit as shown. Changing bags after each
patient is more effective and more rapid than disinfection.
Damage to equipment from disinfectants also is avoided. Do
not routinely disinfect surfaces that have been covered.

CHAPTER

8

I nfection Control

paper, or plastic film, or surgical pack wraps (paper or
towels) should cover the entire tray, including edges.
Special-sized commercial plastic bags and covers designed for dentistry are available and offer both a good
fit and ease of dispensing. They are worthwhile investments for a dental practice. Materials from commercial
plastics supply companies or restaurant supply companies are cheaper and are used in many clinics and offices. Plastic film, sandwich bags, or a small sheet of foil
wrap have proven serviceable for covering operatory
light handles. Removable lamp handles that can be sterilized also can be used. (Plastic or foil wrap is less expensive and covers far better than gauze sponges.) Use
plastic film to cover dental control units that cannot be
covered with bags. Inexpensive large clear plastic bags
are used in numerous offices to cover chair back, control
unit, and hose supports. Bags used by dry cleaning establishments also can be used to cover chairs and arms.
Clear plastic 15-gallon waste container bags fit many
chair backs, control units, and x-ray equipment. Plastic,
restaurant, silverware bags fit suction handles, and air/
water syringe handles (see Fig. 8-9).
After each appointment, discard and replace bags and
covers without cleaning and disinfecting covered equipment items. If covers come off, become torn, or otherwise allow equipment to become contaminated, thoroughly clean and disinfect the item before recovering it
for the next appointment.
Preparation of Semicritical Items (Attached to the
Dental Unit for Reuse) and Noncritical Items (Supporting or Environmental). Instruments that contact
cut tissues or penetrate tissues are considered to be critical items that require thorough cleaning and sterilization for reuse. .
A number of items attached to the
dental unit are used intraorally. They are either handled
by gloved hands coated with blood and saliva or may
touch mucosa. CDC guidelines consider these semicritical items. Items that are not ordinarily touched during treatments are termed noncritical items.
Semicritical Items. Semicritical items that touch mucosa are the air/water syringe tip, suction tips, prophy
angle, and handpieces. Others (air/water syringe handle,
suction hose ends, lamp handle, and switches) are handled or touched interchangeably with treatment instruments that become contaminated with blood and saliva.
Semicritical items must be removed for cleaning and
sterilization unless they are either disposable or can be
protected from contamination with disposable plastic
covers. This applies especially to air-water syringe tips.
Semicritical items should not be disinfected only. As
stated before, they should be covered, cleaned and sterilized, or discarded. Some bacteria often remain after
use of the best disinfectant.", ", " However, when a cover
comes off, or when disinfection is the only recourse,
semicritical items must be scrubbed clean, preferably at
the sink; disinfected; and then wiped again using a fresh,

alcohol sponge. Surface disinfection is not adequate for
items with a lumen such as air-water syringe tips.
Noncritical Items. Noncritical items are environmental surfaces such as chairs, benches, floors, walls, and
supporting equipment of the dental unit that are not ordinarily touched during treatments. Lengths of hoses
that connect equipment to the control unit become spattered but need not be touched. Contaminated noncritical items require cleaning and disinfection.
Disinfection is always at least a two-step procedure:
the initial step involves vigorous scrubbing of the surfaces to be disinfected and wiping them clean; the second step involves wetting the surface with a disinfectant and leaving it wet for the time prescribed by the
manufacturer. Many water-based disinfectants contain
detergents that make them effective cleaners. So, some
products can be used for both steps. However, there is
no such thing as a "one-step disinfectant." The disinfectant step must always be preceded by cleaning.
Wear protective utility gloves to clean equipment that
cannot be covered. For cleaning and disinfecting environmental surfaces, nitrile latex utility gloves are preferred. Disinfectants can penetrate treatment gloves to
irritate covered skin, and these less sturdy gloves are
prone to small tears. Use a water-based disinfectant
cleaner (e.g., a synthetic phenolic complex disinfectant),
a chlorhexidine antiseptic scrub, or other suitable
cleaner to scrub equipment. Next, wipe items dry with
a paper towel. Then, wet them with an EPA-registered
disinfectant or one with an FDA premarket review, and
leave them wet for the time specified by the disinfectant manufacturer.
Although uncovered chair arms may become spattered and need to be covered or disinfected, the chair itself is considered a noncritical item. Areas of the chair
not contaminated by spatter need not be disinfected, except for housekeeping purposes. Chair backs and control units are covered to protect control buttons from
operator gloved finger contamination and spatter, as
well as from the damaging effects of disinfectants, and
time for disinfecting is saved. A total chair cover can
provide the same or more advantages.
Disinfectants. Preferred disinfectants are those that
can inactivate polio or coxsackieviruses (because they
are nonlipid viruses similar to HB in resistance).5
Disinfectants must be active against Mycobacterium species, common respiratory viruses, and common bacterial hospital pathogens (e.g., Staphylococcus and Pseudomonas species). All such disinfectants readily inactivate
HIV in 1 to 2 minutes.
Glutaraldehydes at concentrations used for instrument disinfection are far too toxic to be used on operatory surfaces and take at least 20 minutes to kill Mycobacterium species.
Unfortunately, the reliability of testing disinfectants
against mycobacteria and HB is controversial and crite-

CHAPTER

ria for evaluating disinfectants are being revised."' Preferred disinfectants registered by the EPA include: 1:10
to 1:100 dilutions of 5% hypochlorite in water (household bleach); plain dilute iodine solutions; iodophor
disinfectants containing phosphoric acid; water-based
synthetic complex phenolic derivatives containing 9%
o-phenyl-phenol and 1% o-benzyl-p-chlorophenol diluted 1 ounce to 1 quart of water to give 0.3% final concentration of synthetic complex phenols; 79% ethyl alcohol sprays containing 0.1% phenylphenol, or other ethyl
alcohol disinfectants containing 60% or more alcohol.
(Isopropyl alcohol may be used, but ethyl alcohol is preferred.) Activity of disinfectants is reduced by organic
debris or blood. Iodines are especially sensitive to the
presence of blood . 41-116 Whereas most disinfectants can
be applied with paper towels or gauze pads, some types
of cellulose paper or fiber react with iodine to produce a
greenish, black, or blue color reaction, which usually indicates inactivation. Most water-based disinfectants are
effective for removing dried blood. Alcohols tend to
harden whole blood that is dried on surfaces, making
the surfaces difficult to clean. 92 ( Alcohols were used to
harden and fix blood films on glass slides in hematology
laboratories). Disinfectants containing 70% to 79% ethyl
alcohol are considered the most effective disinfectants
on cleaned surfaces . 41,44,116
Regarding disinfection, remember these two principles: (1) Disinfection cannot occur until fresh disinfectant is
reapplied to a thoroughly cleaned surface ,46 and (2) disinfection does not sterilize .71,102,
Chlorine and iodine found in some disinfectants can
react with or be absorbed by the plastic in some types of
dispensing bottles, which must be refilled with fresh solution daily. Consult and follow manufacturer's directions in this regard.
Manufacturers specify a time to leave items wet with
disinfectant for disinfection. This is usually 10 minutes.
Most disinfectants, except plain phenol, appear to be active in approximately 5 minutes according to manufacturer data. Equipment left wet until the next patient is
seated has usually been wet for at least 5 minutes. But
this should be taken into careful consideration. Data on
kill times should be obtained from the manufacturer.
After sufficient time, wet items can be dried with a paper towel.
Step-by-Step Preparation of the Dental Chair,
Dental Unit, and Instruments. As well as not being ac-

ceptable for semicritical items, the disinfectants generally considered most active against microorganisms are,
unfortunately, the most drying or destructive to plastic
chair covers and equipment. This again validates the
use of covers wherever possible. When covers are used,
the effectiveness of the disinfectants becomes less critical and protecting equipment is easier.
Following is an example of step-by-step SOPS for
preparation of the dental chair, dental unit, and instru-

8

I nfection Control

ments between appointments. (Remember, do not disinfect surfaces and items covered with plastic drape after
each treatment unless the plastic cover was torn or came
off during treatment.)
1. With hands still gloved after the last treatment, remove and invert chair back cover, discard cotton
rolls and other disposable materials into the cover,
and discard cover into the operatory trash bin. Remove and discard gloves aseptically.
2. Wash hands with antiseptic hand soap, rinse, and
dry. Place three paper towels on the seat of the dental chair for later placement of air/water syringe
and ends of suction hoses. Put on nitrile latex utility
gloves.
3. With the used suction tip, clean saliva and debris
from the cuspidor trap if present. Discard disposable suction tip into the operatory trash bin.
4. Remove (unscrew) from the anesthetic syringe the
resheathed needle, and discard it with all other
sharp disposable items in a sharps container. Using
a Stick-shield is advised (see Chapter 10). Remove the
anesthetic cartridge before removing the needle to decrease the risk of an occupational needlestick. Handling
needles without using a protective one-handed capping
device and gathering instruments without heavy protective gloves account for most injury exposure incidents.

5. Place any loose sharp instruments and instrument
cassettes into a perforated metal basket, and then
lower the basket into disinfectant solution in a covered hard-walled pan. Return the air/water syringe tip, handpieces, and pan of instruments to
the cleanup area. Using handles provided, remove
the basket of instruments, rinse, and then place
into the ultrasonic cleaner.
6. Before handling disinfectant-dispensing bottles,
wash utility gloves (on hands) with antiseptic scrub,
rinse, and dry.
7. Spray any used bottles, containers, tubes, and unused burs with disinfectant, and wipe with a paper
towel. Spray again, and leave damp with disinfectant as they are put away. Spraying in this manner
has been found effective . 116 However, if there is a
concern about breathing any irritating or possibly
harmful aerosols that are produced, apply the disinfectant with any disposable material that will not
inactivate the disinfectant.
8. Remove the air/water syringe (now minus its removable tip) and suction hoses from the hangers on
the control unit. Remove the plastic covers from
hose ends and discard. Lay the air/water syringe
and suction hose ends on the paper towels previously placed on the dental chair.
9. Invert, remove, and discard plastic drapes from the
control unit (Fig. 8-10); remove and discard protective covers from lamp handles, and surface covering

CHAPTER 8

I nfection Control

FIG 8-10 Wear suitable protective gloves to undrape the unit.

FIG . 8-11 I nstall the suction tip and cover it with a slender

Remove hoses from their hangers and lay them on paper towels on the chair. Pull the draping bag off of the control unit so
i t will invert. Pull a clean bag over the unit from the front with
clean hands and tuck it around the back and bottom. Cover
equipment support arms as well.

plastic bag. Push the tip through the end of the bag and continue sliding the bag to cover the handle area of the hose.
Wrap a piece of suitable tape at the bag/tip junction, as shown,
to secure the bag against creeping and prevent exposing the
handle to contamination. After use, the bag comes off with the
plastic tip for easy removal and disposal.

from the side table. These disposables may be placed
into the large bag removed from the control unit.
10. For any controls and switches that were not covered, wet a paper towel with disinfectant spray and
wipe lamp switch and controls that were contaminated. (Do not spray control switches.) Wipe any
contaminated surfaces not previously covered: side
table, arms of dental chair, contaminated drawer
handles, radiographic viewbox switch, and paper
towel dispenser. Discard wet paper towels.
11. Use a second towel wet with disinfectant to rewet
these items and leave them wet. (Paper towels neutralize iodine disinfectants and should not be used
to apply them.)
12. Spray the outside and inside of the cuspidor, if present, with disinfectant. Use two paper towels to prevent gloves from contacting the cuspidor while first
wiping the outside and then the inside of the cuspidor. Discard towels. Wipe any overspray of disinfectant from the operatory floor. Discard towels into
the trash bin.
13. Spray any contaminated faucet handles, sink countertop, and trash disposal openings with disinfectant and wipe dry with paper towel. Discard towel
and respray areas with disinfectant and leave damp.
14. Wash utility gloves (still on hands) with strong antiseptic hand scrub or disinfectant cleaner, rinse thoroughly, and dry them with paper towels. Discard
towels into trash bin. Remove utility gloves and rehang them in the operatory. Wash hands. Contaminated utility gloves can be cleaned and disinfected.
Nitrile latex gloves can be autoclaved.

tected with covers are touched. Use a paper towel or
treatment glove to handle questionable surfaces such as
hoses. The unit is prepared as follows:

To prepare the unit for the next patient, gloves need
not be worn if only clean surfaces that have been pro-

1. Pull a large clear plastic bag-cover over the dental control unit from the front and tuck excess up under the
unit (see Fig. 8-10). Split the bag up one side to cover
mobile delivery system units with large surfaces.
2. Pull another bag down over the chair back; also cover
chair arms.
3. Install suction and air/water syringe tips. Place a
slender bag over each tip, pushing the tip through
the end of the bag and then sliding the bag down to
cover all of the handle. For the suction tip, wrap autoclave tape at the tip /bag junction to secure the bag
against creeping and to prevent contamination of the
handle area of the hose (Fig. 8-11). It usually is not
necessary to tape the bag onto the air-water syringe.
Press handles into the forked hangers on the unit that
are covered by the plastic bag (Fig. 8-12).
4. Install sterilized handpieces. A plastic sleeve may be
used to cover the motor-end of the low-speed handpiece that is not sterilized (see Fig. 8-9). Rehang handpieces. If the plastic film obstructs the electric eye in
the hanger, use a small finger to pull out the film
when the handle is removed.
5. Set out materials and instrument packs; open packs,
being careful not to touch sterilized instruments with
bare hands.
6. Seat the patient and put on a clean mask, eyewear,
and gloves.
Protection of Complex Devices Against Contamination. Cameras, light-curing units, lasers, intraoral cam-

eras, air abrasion units, and so on, are examples of com-

CHAPTER

8

I nfection Control

Dos and Don'ts of Instrument Recycling

FIG .8-12

Replace equipment attached to hoses by using the
device to simply press the loose plastic film into the forked
holder.

plex devices that must be protected against contamination. They are used in the operatory and cannot be sterilized or even readily disinfected. Clear plastic bags of
suitable size obtained from plastics or dental supply
companies are effective single-use protective barriers.

PROCEDURES, MATERIALS, AND DEVICES
FOR CLEANING INSTRUMENTS
BEFORE STERILIZATION
According to ADA guidelines and CDC specifications,
instruments that touch mucosa or penetrate tissues must
be cleaned and then sterilized before reuse (Box 8-1). 5

Principles and Procedures for Handling and Cleani ng Instruments After Treatment. Instrument cleaning
procedures should be designed to be effective while
avoiding risks such as grasping and scrubbing groups
of single- and double-ended sharp instruments. Instrument grasping and scrubbing are the most exposureprone tasks encountered after treatments, even when
protective utility gloves are worn.
The safest and most efficient instrument cleaning procedures involve ultrasonic cleaning of used instruments
kept in a perforated basket or cassette throughout the
cleaning procedure. 17,44,50,115 Wear protective utility gloves
at all times to handle contaminated containers and
instruments.
Some dentists require all instruments to be placed directly into the sterilizer and steam sterilized before cleaning. They believe the increased safety of handling heatprocessed instruments outweighs any disadvantages.
Depending on the sterilizer, contaminated instruments
may be placed directly into the sterilizer in an empty pan
or cassette, or they may be submerged in a detergent solution containing a rust inhibitor. Contact the manufacturer of your sterilizer for guidance in this regard.
Procedures for Instrument Processing. Transport to
the cleanup area instrument cassettes and any loose instruments in a perforated metal basket lowered by han-

dles into a disinfectant detergent solution contained in a
covered hard-walled pan.
Note that organic debris on instruments is likely to reduce activity of the disinfectant. Soaking used instruments before cleaning primarily keeps fresh debris from
drying but also helps soften and loosen any dried debris. Leave instruments in their basket or cassette while
rinsing them well. Next, move the cassettes or basket of
instruments into an ultrasonic cleaning device for cleaning (Fig. 8-13), rinse them again, and then carefully inUse tongs to remove
spect the instruments for debris.
any instruments left uncleaned. Remove the debris from
these instruments individually, keeping hands well protected with utility gloves. Dip instruments likely to rust
into a rust inhibitor such as fresh rust-retarding cleaning solution (e.g., solution from Health Sonics Corp.,
Pleasanton, California). Drain and air-dry instruments

CHAPTER

8

I nfection Control

FIG 8-13

An example of a commercial ultrasonic cleaner with
a rust-inhibiting soaking and cleaning solution is shown.
(Courtesy of Health Sonics Corp., Pleasanton, Calif.)

in cassettes or carefully spill the basket of instruments
onto an absorbent towel on a tray. Wet instruments can
be patted with a thickly folded towel. Treat both the
towels and tray as contaminated items. Still wearing
protective gloves, properly package the instruments together with internal and external sterilization indicators
suited to the sterilization process used."
Protective utility gloves made of nitrile latex are the
most puncture resistant and are obtainable from dental
suppliers. These gloves can be washed and wiped with
disinfectant or autoclaved after use as needed. Household utility gloves are not suitable for handling and
cleaning sharp instruments.
Instrument containers are used as specified by the following OSHA regulations:
1. Immediately, or as soon as possible after use, place
contaminated reusable sharps into appropriate containers until they are properly reprocessed. Containers must be puncture resistant, properly labeled or
color coded, and leakproof on sides and bottom.
Cover the container to transport the instruments to
the cleanup area.
2. Reusable contaminated sharps shall not be stored or
processed in a manner that requires employees (with
or without protective gloves) to reach by hand into
containers where these sharps have been placed.
If instruments can be securely enclosed in a cassette
(Fig. 8-14), rewrapping the cassette in its sturdy sterilization wrapping paper may be considered by OSHA authorities to provide sufficient protection against injury or
contamination while transporting the instruments. This
option should be verified with local OSHA authorities.
Otherwise, the OSHA criteria are met by placing instruments into a basket or cassette with attachable handles,

or by using other methods that avoid hand-reaching into
the hard-walled containers to place, process, and remove
used instruments.
Some OSHA consultants have prescribed that used
instruments be placed in a hard-walled container of disinfectant soaking or holding solution before removing
the instruments from the operatory. Although soaking is
desirable to prevent debris from hardening on instruments, the OSHA regulation does not appear to address
such holding solutions.
A disinfectant holding solution for transporting and/
or soaking used instruments should contain a detergent,
be economical so it can be discarded frequently, not corrode instruments in a reasonable time, be one of the least
inactivated by organic debris, not give off toxic aldehyde
vapors, and have 10-minute well-verified antimicrobial
claims against TB and preferably against polio or coxsackievirus. Some concentrated phenolic-derivative products that must be diluted for use and a product recommended by an ultrasonic device manufacturer (Health
Sonics Corp., Pleasanton, California) meet most of these
criteria reasonably well. However, no product is currently
considered able to completely disinfect soiled instruments, so protective gloves must still be worn until the
instruments have been fully wrapped for sterilization.
When it is necessary to clean instruments by hand,
use a suitable brush along with a disinfectant cleaner.
Severe irritation, infection of unprotected eyes, or both
can result from spatter of the disinfectant, detergents, or
chlorhexidine gluconate hand cleansers often used to
scrub instruments. Hand injury from double-ended instruments is the other main risk as indicated before.
Wear heavy gloves, eye protection, a mask or a face
shield, and a protective garment or apron to protect
against spatter. Use a long-handled pan-scrubbing
brush. Grasp the mid-handle portion of only a few instruments at a time with fingers and thumb to protect the
palm and to rotate the instruments. Brush away from
yourself, down into the sink, using at least 5 strokes per
end while rotating them. Pay attention to removing visible soil and debris. Rinse with an aerated stream of water to avoid spatter.
Scrape or use an appropriate solvent cleaner to remove coatings such as plaster, wax, cement, and impression material. When finished cleaning, use heavy gloves,
disinfectant, and paper towels to clean up spattered or
contaminated surfaces around the sink.
Ultrasonic Cleaners and Solutions. Ultrasonic cleaning is the safest and most efficient way to clean sharp instruments (see Fig. 8-13). Burs should be ultrasonically
cleaned as well. To contain burs, place them in a fine
screen basket, metal tea ball, or bur caddy. Some hinged
instruments (e.g., some brands of orthodontics pliers)
should not be submerged in ultrasonic or disinfectant
cleaning solutions if hinges will corrode or rust. Consult
the manufacturer.

CHAPTER 8

FIG. 8-14 Examples of three cassettes designed to hold instruments while they are cleaned and sterilized, supplied by
Health Science Products, Birmingham, Ala. (left), Hu-Friedy,
Chicago, III. (center), and Zirc Dental Products, Inc., Minneapolis, Minn. (right).

Ultrasonic cleaning can be one to nine times more effective than hand cleaning if the ultrasonic device functions properly and is used as directed by the manufacturer. An ultrasonic cleaning device should provide
fast and thorough cleaning without damage to instruments; have a lid, well-designed basket, and audible
timer; and be engineered to prevent electronic interference with other electronic equipment and office communication systems.
1. Observe operating precautions.
2. Operate the tank at one-half to three-fourths full of
cleaning solution at all times. Use only cleaning solutions recommended by ultrasonic device manufacturers. Change solutions as directed. An antimicrobial cleaning solution is preferred. Studies sponsored
by one company indicated that their antibacterial solution remained free of contamination for approximately 3 days of continued reuse (Health Sonics
Corp., Pleasanton, California).
3. Operate the ultrasonic cleaner for 5 minutes or longer
as directed by the manufacturer to give optimal cleaning, possibly up to 1 minute per instrument.
4. Coatings such as plaster, wax, cement, and impression material can be removed with an appropriate
solvent cleaner and then placed in a beaker in the ultrasonic device. Consult ultrasonic device manufacturers or dental product distributors.
5. Verify ultrasonic performance monthly or when poor
performance is suspected by using a foil test as described below. Devices that have less than two transducers do not pass the foil test and are not suitable
for instrument cleaning. Performance of ultrasonic
devices used without periodic testing and maintenance is often poor
.39

To perform an ultrasonic cleaner foil test, remove the
basket from the device. Add solution to the tank, and

I nfection Control

operate the device for 5 minutes to expel dissolved gases
as directed by the manufacturer. Measure the depth of
the solution and the length (longest dimension) of the
tank. From a roll of aluminum foil, cut a sheet approximately 1 inch more than the depth of the solution in the
metal tank. Cut the length 1 inch less than the length of
the tank. Hold the foil like a curtain vertically submerged in the solution in the center of the tank approxi mately one-half inch above the bottom. (Caution: do
not immerse fingers.) Without allowing the edges of the
curtain to touch the tank, operate the device for exactly
20 seconds. Upon close inspection, every square onehalf inch of the foil should show small visible indentations or perforations if the ultrasonic device functions
properly. The foil test can be performed in the midline,
front, and rear areas of the tank to determine uniformity.
Labeled foil sheets can be filed to document test results.
(This method was adapted from directions of Health
Sonics Corp., Pleasanton, California.)
I nstrument Containment. Cloth packs, wraps, tubes
of nylon film, or commercial paper/plastic bags are suitable for instrument containment if they are compatible
with the method and temperature of sterilization. Various kinds of instrument trays and cassettes (see Fig. 8-14)
are manufactured to contain instruments at chairside,
and they can be placed in an ultrasonic cleaner, rinsed,
and packaged ready for sterilization. Cassettes provide
convenience, safety in handling and cleaning batches of
instruments, and maintenance of instrument organization for efficient use.

STERILIZATION
Infectious dental patients are often undetected. Sterilization provides a method of instrument recycling that
can be monitored and documented to show that conditions for control of disease transmission were indeed established. Because most instruments contact mucosa
and/or penetrate oral tissues, it is essential that reused
instruments be thoroughly cleaned and sterilized by accepted methods that can be routinely tested and moniHeat sterilization takes less time than hightored .
level sporicidal disinfection, which is required when
heat or gas sterilization cannot be used. It is important
to recognize that sterilization practices were found unreliable in 15% to 31% of dental offices surveyed where
routine monitoring was not used to evaluate and maintain correct sterilization performance.
The four accepted methods of sterilization are:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Steam pressure sterilization (autoclave)
Chemical vapor pressure sterilization (chemiclave)
Dry heat sterilization (dryclave)
Ethylene oxide sterilization

Each method and each commercial modification has
very specific requirements regarding timing, temperature,

CHAPTER 8

I nfection Control

suitable packaging of materials, and kinds of items and
materials that can be safely and effectively sterilized 43.45.46
Ignoring any of these specifications can prevent sterilization or damage materials or instruments.
It is best to evaluate office needs and examine various
sterilizer capabilities and then carefully select one or
two methods of sterilization. Kinds and sizes of sterilization equipment depend on the treatment instrumentation used in the practice. Stainless steel instruments
and mirrors used for operative, endodontic, periodontics,
or dental hygiene procedures can be sterilized by any
accepted method. Both high- and low-speed handpieces
are best autoclaved. Burs, discussed later, can be safely
sterilized by dry heat or chemical vapor in a chemiclave
or in a gas sterilizer, but they may rust or corrode if not
protected from steam in the autoclave. Metal impression
trays can be sterilized by any method, but dry heat
above 345° F may remove soldered handles. Orthodontic pliers of high quality stainless steel will resist corrosion in an autoclave; lower quality stainless steel found
in some pliers must be sterilized by dry heat or chemical
vapor. Towels and towelpacks of instruments needed for
surgery are best sterilized by autoclaving; chemical vapor pressure sterilization does not penetrate cloth well.
Perhaps the widest variety of instruments would be
found in pediatric dentistry and thus may require more
than one sterilization method.
A sterilizer will be used every day of practice. Choose
reliable sterilization equipment of proper size and cycle
time compatible with needs of the practice. Patient load,
turnaround time for instrument reuse, size of instrument inventory and instrument variety, and instrument
quality must all be balanced against the type and size of
sterilizer selected and the number of auxiliary personnel employed. Some offices have personnel come in at
night to clean and sterilize instruments. Careful planning
toward a central goal is more practical, effective, and
economical than adapting several sterilization methods.
Sterilizer modification and development is changing
more rapidly now than ever before. Choosing equipment that is well established still is the safest and most
reliable approach.
STEAM PRESSURE STERILIZATION
( AUTOCLAVING)
Sterilization with steam under pressure is performed in
a steam autoclave (Fig. 8-15). For a light load of instruments, the time required at 250'F (121° C) is a minimum
of 15 minutes at 15 lbs of pressure. Time for wrapped instruments can be reduced to 7 minutes if the temperature is raised to approximately 273° F (134° C) to give
30 pounds of pressure. Time required for the sterilizer to
reach the correct temperature is not included. Bench
models may be automatic or manually operated. Manual sterilizers should have both a temperature and pressure gauge so temperatures can be related to corre-

FIG . 8-15 An example of a steam pressure sterilizer (autoclave).
(Courtesy of Pelton and Crane, Charlotte, NC.)

sponding temperatures required for sterilization. Unlike
hospital autoclaves, bench models depend on gravity
flow to distribute steam throughout the load rather than
first evacuating air from the sterilizer and then refilling
it with steam. Therefore bench models require more
caution against the use of large or tightly packed loads.
Steam must enter and circulate around packs easily. Instrument pans or other impermeable instrument containers must be left open so steam can enter. Except for
containers of solutions, all metal items must be dry.
Moisture evaporating from instruments can slow the
heating process. Sterilization must be tested routinely
(see Monitors of Sterilization) .
Advantages of Autoclaves. Autoclaving is the most
rapid and effective method for sterilizing cloth surgical
packs and towel packs. Other methods are not suitable
for processing cloth packs. Automated models are available, although they still can be misused or fail almost as
often as nonautomated ones; they must be evaluated
with a biologic spore test monitoring system.
Disadvantages of Autoclaves. Items sensitive to the
elevated temperature cannot be autoclaved. Autoclaving tends to rust carbon steel instruments and burs.
Steam appears to corrode the steel neck and shank portions of some diamond instruments and carbide burs.
Sterilization of Burs in Autoclaves. For autoclave
sterilization, burs can be protected by keeping them
submerged in a small amount of 2% sodium nitrite solution.
Sodium nitrite crystals (not nitrate) can be obtained from distributors of scientific products and chemicals, or a pharmacy. Add 20 g (2/ 3 oz) of nitrite to 1 L of
pure water. Store tightly sealed. After ultrasonic cleaning, burs can be rinsed and placed into any small metal
or glass beaker with a perforated lid (e.g., a metal salt
shaker). Fill the beaker with sufficient fresh nitrite solution to have it above the burs, approximately 1 cm. Leave
the container uncovered or use a perforated cover. Place
the container of burs and fluid into the sterilizer, and

CHAPTER 8

I nfection Control

DRY HEAT STERILIZATION

FIG 8-16 Chemical

vapor pressure sterilizer ( Chemiclave).

(Courtesy of MDT Biologic Co., Rancho Dominguez, Calif)

operate a normal sterilization cycle. Discard the fluid
from the container through the perforated lid. Use sterile forceps to place the burs into a sterilized bur holder
or tray. Store the burs dry. Before use, any nitrite residue
can be wiped away, or rinsed off with clean or sterile
water, if desired.
CHEMICAL VAPOR PRESSURE
STERILIZATION (CHEMICLAVING)
Sterilization by chemical vapor under pressure is performed in a Chemiclave (MDT Biologic Co., Rancho
Dominguez, California) (Fig. 8-16). Chemical vapor pressure sterilizers operate at 270° F (131° C) and 20 pounds
of pressure. They are similar to steam sterilizers and
have a cycle time of approximately half an hour. Like
ethylene oxide sterilizers, they must be used with a prescribed chemical and should be properly labeled to satisfy OSHA's Chemical Hazard Communication Standard. Newer models appear to handle aldehyde vapors
well; vapors from older models must be safely vented.
Loading cautions similar to those for autoclaving must
be used. Water left on instruments loaded into the chamber can defeat sterilization.
Advantages of Chemiclaves. Carbon steel and other
corrosion-sensitive burs, instruments, and pliers are
said to be sterilized without rust or corrosion.
Disadvantages of Chemiclaves. Items sensitive to
the elevated temperature will be damaged. Instruments
must be lightly packaged in bags obtained from the sterilizer manufacturer. Towels and heavy cloth wrappings
of surgical instruments may not be penetrated to provide sterilization. Routinely use biologic spore test monitoring strips to confirm heat penetration of heavy packs
before using them (see Monitors of Sterilization). Only
fluid purchased from the sterilizer manufacturer can be
used. Load only dry instruments, and check the door
gasket for leaks to avoid frequent sterilization monitoring failures.

Conventional Dry Heat Ovens. Dry heat sterilization is readily achieved at temperatures above 320° F
(160° C). Conventional professional dry heat ovens
that have been sold for instrument sterilization have
heated chambers that allow air to circulate by gravity
flow (gravity convection). Packs of instruments must
be placed at least 1 cm apart to allow heated air to circulate. Individual instruments must actually be heated
at 320° F for 30 minutes to achieve sterilization. Increasing the total time by 50% as a safety factor is recommended. Total time required also depends on the
efficiency of the oven for its size, the size of the load,
and how instruments are packaged. Foil wrap or special nylon bags are used. Approximately 60 to 90 minutes may be required to sterilize a medium load of
lightly wrapped instruments in an oven set at a range
of 335° to 345° F. Temperatures vary at least 5° above
and below the setting, so a range rather than a specific
temperature must be set.
Use of a sterilizer not reviewed by the FDA for instrument
sterilization or using one inappropriately may result in the
dentist being liable for any adverse consequences.

Without careful calibration, more sterilization failures
are obtained with gravity convection dry heat ovens
than any other type of sterilizer. The only accurate way
to calibrate a sterilization cycle in most relatively inexpensive industrial and professional dry heat ovens is
by using an external temperature gauge (pyrometer) attached to a thermocouple wire. The other end of the
wire is extended inside the oven and tied to an instrument in a centrally located pack to measure its exact
temperature. Battery-operated pyrometers are available
from scientific supply companies.
Short-Cycle, High-Temperature Dry Heat Ovens. A
rapid high-temperature process that uses a forced-draft
oven (a mechanical convection oven that circulates air
with a fan or blower) is available. It reduces total sterilization time to 6 minutes for unwrapped and 12 minutes
for wrapped instruments (Fig. 8-17) (Cox Manufacturing
Corp. and Dentronics Corp.). These short-cycle hightemperature dry heat ovens operate at approximately
370° to 375° F. Chamber size of one brand is limited to
processing about one set of instruments at a time, but is
more effective for wrapped instruments and also may be
adapted for a shorter heat disinfection cycle (consult the
Cox Manufacturing Corp.).
Confirm that a sterilizer manufacturer has obtained
premarket review by the FDA for their instrument sterilization device before purchasing a rapid dry heat sterilizer. Unfortunately, this requirement has not prevented some clinicians from adapting nonprofessional
equipment for office use. Legal professionals have begun to anticipate how a jury may view use of home
roasting ovens to sterilize professional treatment instruments. Moderately priced small ovens manufactured

CHAPTER

8

I nfection Control

has a premarket review by the FDA in order to sterilize
handpieces. Automatic devices sterilize items in several
hours and operate at elevated temperatures well below
100° C. Less expensive devices operate overnight to produce sterilization at room temperature (Fig. 8-18). Both
types meet OSHA requirements. Porous and plastic materials absorb the gas and require aeration for 24 hours
or more before it is safe for them to contact skin or tissues. Units with large chamber sizes hold more instruments or packs per cycle; however, they are very expensive. Some chamber designs or sizes are better suited to
accept stacks of instrument trays. Manufacturers should
be consulted to obtain detailed information about these
sterilizers. Consult IC texts or dental product distributors (e.g., Anderson Products Co., Haw River, North
Carolina; 3M Co., Minneapolis, Minnesota).
BOILING WATER

FIG 8-17 Cox rapid heat transfer dry heat sterilizer. (Courtesy
of E.T.M. Corporation, Monrovia, Calif.)

Boiling water does not kill spores and cannot sterilize
instruments. However, heat can reach and kill bloodborne pathogens in places that liquid sterilants and disinfectants used at room temperature cannot reach. Boiling is a method of high-level disinfection that has been
used when actual sterilization cannot be achieved (e.g.,
in case of a sterilizer breakdown)." Well-cleaned items
must be completely submerged and allowed to boil at
98° to 100° C (at sea level) for 10 minutes. Great care must

for industrial and scientific use by industrial manufacturers (e.g., Blue M Co., Blue Island, Illinois) are usually
more accurate and reliable than ovens designed for
home use. Careful calibration with a pyrometer to ensure that instruments reach and maintain sterilization
temperatures is imperative. Once again, obtain evidence
of FDA review of the equipment for instrument sterilization, or obtain legal advice before purchasing and using this type of oven for instrument sterilization.
Proper, weekly monitoring of all sterilizers, including
dry heat ovens, is imperative. Some sterilization monitoring services now refuse to monitor sterilizers that do
not have premarket review by the FDA.
Advantages of Dry Heat Sterilization. Carbon steel
instruments and burs do not rust, corrode, or lose their
temper or cutting edges if they are well dried before
processing. Industrial forced-draft hot air ovens usually
provide a larger capacity at a reasonable price. Rapid
cycles are possible at high temperatures.
Disadvantages of Dry Heat Sterilization. High temperatures may damage more heat-sensitive items, such
as rubber or plastic goods. Sterilization cycles are prolonged at the lower temperatures. Heavy loads of instruments, crowding of packs, and heavy wrapping easily
defeat sterilization. Cycles are not automatically timed
on some models. Inaccurate calibration, lack of attention
to proper settings, and adding instruments without restarting the timing are other common sources of error.

Various new methods of sterilization are under investigation and development. The microwave oven has major
limitations for sterilizing metal items, by either damaging the machine or not reaching all sides of the instruments. Research efforts to overcome such limitations are
ongoing in industry. Ultraviolet light is not highly effective against RNA viruses such as HIV and is not very effective against bacterial spores.
Incomplete exposures of all surfaces and poor penetration of oil and
debris are other limitations. Ultraviolet irradiation may
be useful for sanitizing room air to help control tuberculosis bacteria . 26
One valuable guide to whether a commercial device
is an effective sterilizer rests upon whether the FDA can
find it equivalent to other effective and proven devices
now in common use. Before purchasing any medical device in question, require the manufacturer to provide
documentation of FDA premarketing review.

ETHYLENE OXIDE STERILIZATION

MONITORS OF STERILIZATION

Ethylene oxide sterilization is the best method for sterilizing complex instruments and delicate materials. However, you must verify that the sterilizer you plan to use

Sterilization assurance not only protects patients from
cross-infections, but also protects personnel from the infections of previous patients as well. Effective instru-

be exercised that instruments remain covered with boiling
water the entire time. Simple steaming is not reliable. Pres-

sure cooking, similar to steam autoclaving, is preferred
and would be required at high altitudes.
NEW METHODS OF STERILIZATION

CHAPTER 8

I nfection Control

ment sterilization is assured by routine monitoring of
instrument sterilization and has become a standard of
care. Monitoring services are provided by most major
schools.
In microbiology literature, sterilization is defined as
killing all forms of life, including the most heat-resistant
forms, bacterial spores. For instruments that can penetrate

tissues, this provides control of spore-forming tetanus
and gas gangrene species, as well as all pathogens borne
by blood and secretions. For instrumentation used in
body cavities that routinely touch mucosa, sterilization
provides a margin of safety for assuring destruction of
HB, mycobacteria, and other pathogenic bacteria and
viruses that can become involved in cross-infections.
Weekly sterilization monitoring of highly efficient automated sterilizers in hospitals has been mandated for
many years by the joint Commission of Accreditation of
Hospitals (Chicago, Illinois), an organization formed by
the profession to monitor and accredit its own performance. Many state examining or disciplinary boards
have now provided that type of regulation. Defense
against litigation also has become a concern of professional liability insurers. Despite the high quality of large
automated hospital sterilizers, most are monitored more
frequently than those in dental offices.
In dental offices, sterilization must be monitored weekly
with biologic spore tests using heat-resistant spores and
tested daily with color-change process-indicator strips.
Documentation of routine monitoring in a daily-entry sterilization notebook allows confirmation of sterilizer operator performance, as well as the proper functioning of the
equipment. Problems are identified and corrected. Evidence of sterilization assurance is also available when unavoidable localized or systemic posttreatment infections
occur and instrument sterilization may be questioned.
Sterilization monitoring has four components: (1) a sterilization indicator on the instrument bag, stamped with the
date it is sterilized, (2) daily color-change process-indicator
strips, (3) weekly biologic spore test, and (4) documentation notebook.
Sterilization Indicators and Date. Sterilization indicators, both tapes and bags, are marked with heatsensitive dyes that change color easily upon exposure to
heat or sterilization chemicals. Such heat-sensitive markers are important to identify and differentiate those packs
that have been in the sterilizer from those that have not.
Used alone, these indicators are not an adequate measure
of sterilization conditions. Sterilization is task-dependent
as much as time- and temperature-dependent. Always
date the packs and rotate. If not used, packs need to be
sterilized again in 1, 6, or 12 months, depending on the
type of wrap and manufacturer's claims. Ask manufacturers of indicators and instrument packaging materials
for data on their products.
Process Indicator Strips. Process indicator strips provide an inexpensive, qualitative, daily monitor of steril-

FIG. 8-18 Room temperature ethylene oxide sterilizer.

(Cour-

tesy of Anderson Products Company, Burlington, NC.)

izer function, operation, and heat penetration into packs.
Place one of the inexpensive color-change process indicator strips into every surgical pack and in at least one
operative instrument pack in the center of each load.
Chemicals on the strip change color slowly, somewhat
relative to the temperature reached in the pack. As soon
as the pack is opened, the strip can immediately identify
breakdowns and gross overloading. The strip is not an
accurate measure of sterilization time and temperature
exposure.
Biologic Monitoring Strips. A biologic monitoring
spore test strip is the accepted weekly monitor of adequate time and temperature exposure. Spores dried on
absorbent paper strips are calibrated to be killed when
sterilization conditions are reached and maintained for
the necessary time to kill all pathogenic microorganisms. An assistant processes a spore strip in a pack of instruments in an office sterilizer each week. Tests can be
evaluated in the office. However, by sending the strip to
a licensed reference laboratory for testing, the dentist
obtains independent documentation of monitoring frequency and sterilization effectiveness. In the event of
failure, such laboratory personnel provide immediate
expert consultation to help resolve the problem.
Documentation Notebook. In a notebook, affix a
single dated, initialed, indicator strip to a sheet or calendar for each workday, followed by a weekly spore strip
report. The notebook provides valuable sterilization

CHAPTER

S

I nfection Control

documentation. Dated sterilized instrument packs, bags,
and trays provide the final evidence of the sterilization
program.

heat and chemical vapor pressure sterilizers because
these methods reduce the risk of rust.

LIQUID STERILANTS AND
HIGH-LEVEL DISINFECTANTS

DENTAL CONTROL UNIT
WATER SYSTEMS AND
HANDPIECE ASEPSIS

Liquid sterilants are those that can kill bacterial spores
in 6 to 10 hours. These sterilants are high-level disinfectants and are EPA registered. Sterilants used for highlevel disinfection of items for reuse are glutaraldehydes
at 2% to 3% concentrations. Greater dilutions are not encouraged for repeated use.
Organic matter and oxidation reduce activity of reused disinfectant baths. Placing wet items into disinfectant trays dilutes the solution. The level does not change
because solution is carried out when the instruments are
removed. Despite reuse claims of several weeks' duration, studies have shown that disinfectants in heavy use
often lost activity during the second week. Therefore
it is wise to place fresh disinfectant into trays on Monday, and discard it at the end of Friday.
Glutaraldehydes are irritating, sensitizing to skin and
respiratory passages, and can be toxic as indicated in
manufacturers' safety data sheets .57 Keep trays tightly
covered in a well-vented area. Do not use 2% or greater
glutaraldehyde solutions to wipe counters or equipment
(e.g., dental unit and chair). Most glutaraldehydes require 20 minutes to kill tuberculosis bacteria in contrast
with some synthetic phenol complexes and alcohols that
act in 10 minutes or less and are much less toxic.
Uses of High-Level Disinfection. According to the
CDC, instruments that penetrate tissues or contact mucosa are termed critical or semicritical and require cleaning and heat or gas sterilization before reuse .
Few, if
any, instruments now exist that cannot be heat sterilized. High-level disinfection is used mainly for plastic
items that enter the mouth and that cannot withstand
heat sterilization. Plastic cheek retractors, photographic
mirrors, and similar heat-sensitive devices should be replaced with metal types that can be heat sterilized.
Disinfection for 20 to 90 minutes in glutaraldehyde germicides is not appropriate for instruments used in the
mouth. Most require 6 or more hours for sterilization.
Liquid sterilants cannot process prepackaged instruments
or be completely monitored with biologic indicators.
Prophy cups should be discarded and never disinfected for reuse. Used anesthesia carpules and anesthesia
needles must be discarded after a patient appointment
and never be disinfected or heat sterilized for reuse.

TYPES OF INSTRUMENTS AND
STERILIZATION METHODS
Periodontal, restorative, and endodontic instruments are
readily processed by autoclave or chemical vapor pressure sterilization. Carbon steel instruments and burs, if
dried well before sterilizing, are best sterilized by dry

The high-speed handpiece is one component of a complex system of instrumentation operated by the dental
operatory master control unit. Within the head of the
handpiece and supported by delicate bearings, a turbine
assembly holds and rotates the cutting instrument at the
speeds preferred for tooth preparation. The handpiece
is attached by flexible plastic lines to the dental unit that
controls air and water supplied to the handpiece. A
small orifice located below the neck of the handpiece
near the bur supplies either a jet of air to blow away cutting debris or an air-water spray emitted from the same
orifice to lubricate and clean the cutting site; this spray
cools the cutting bur as well.
These components comprise a complex system that is
vulnerable to several unique kinds of contamination by
and through the handpiece. Oral fluid contamination
problems of rotary equipment and especially the highspeed handpiece involve: (1) contamination of handpiece external surfaces and crevices, (2) turbine chamber contamination that enters the mouth, (3) water spray
retraction and aspiration of oral fluids into the water
lines of older dental units, (4) growth of environmental
aquatic bacteria in water lines, and (5) exposure of personnel to spatter and aerosols generated by intraoral
use of rotary equipment. 1,12,50,52,70
If not controlled, external and internal contamination
of this equipment by oral fluids holds infection potentials
for dental patients. Even sterilization of handpieces cannot control contamination related to water spray retraction and bacterial colonization of water lines that holds
infection potentials for immunocompromised patients.

HANDPIECE SURFACE
CONTAMINATION CONTROL
Blood and saliva contaminate the surfaces of handpieces
during various dental treatments. Irregular surfaces and
especially crevices around the bur chuck are difficult to
clean and disinfect, especially by a brief wipe with a
disinfectant-soaked sponge.
Submersion of a high-speed handpiece in a high-level
disinfectant has not been an option accepted by manufacturers. In tests, thorough scrubbing and applying the
best disinfectants to inoculated smooth handpiece surfaces reduced numbers of simple test bacteria but did
not completely eliminate them. 102 Only sterilization can
approach complete IC of handpiece surfaces.

TURBINE CONTAMINATION CONTROL
Contaminated oral fluids may be drawn back into the
turbine chamber by negative pressure created either by a

CHAPTER 8

Venturi effect during operation or when the turbine continues to spin whenever the drive air is stopped. Oral
fluids also may enter around worn bearing seals, or be
aspirated into the vent holes in the top of older handchuck operated handpieces or possibly into the air-water
spray orifice that communicates with the turbine chamber in some handpieces. The question is whether debris
that contains viable microbes in the turbine chamber
may then be vented from holes in the top of the turbine
chamber during the next treatment, as indicated by some
investigators." ,'"
Although turbine contamination can be demonstrated
experimentally under extreme conditions on a laboratory bench, it is not clear under what conditions this may
occur during clinical treatments, nor have air-driven
high-speed handpieces been clearly implicated in this
manner of cross-infection. Cross-contamination potentials of water-driven handpieces that have been used in
a hospital have been demonstrated more easily 53
WATER RETRACTION SYSTEM CORRECTION
Dental unit water control systems made before the midto late 1980s used water lines that easily expanded when
air-water spray was used and gradually contracted
when water pressure was relieved. Handpieces had an
annoying tendency to continue to drip immediately after having been used. To overcome the problem in those
units, a device was installed that retracted water in the
line whenever the spray was stopped. Unfortunately,
more than just water could be retracted. Following use,
oral bacteria have been readily recovered from water
samples obtained from the handpieces and water lines
of those older dental units. 10
Agencies recommend correcting water retraction by
placing a one-way check valve in the water line.
Unfortunately check valves clog and fail. Systems should
be tested monthly if not weekly to verify lack of water
retraction .52 A simple, inexpensive water retraction testing device is available from major dental supply companies that takes only approximately 1 minute to use
(Fig. 8-19). 5 '
The industry also has responded to correct the retraction problem. Since 1988, nearly all manufacturers have
manufactured dental control units that simply cut off
the water spray without retraction. The best solution for
older dental control units, unless the units can be overhauled, is to replace them with newer units that do not
retract.
I NHERENT WATER SYSTEM CONTAMINATION
Microbes exist in the dental unit waterline as freefloating bacteria and as a sessile form known as biofilm.
The microorganisms in the biofilm produce a protective
polysaccharide matrix that provides them a mechanism
for surface attachment and retention to the waterline.", "' This matrix, which can be 30 to 50 um thick, af-

I nfection Control

FIG . 8-19

This device is used to detect retraction of water supplied to the high-speed handpiece by older units when the foot
control is released. If water moves back into the plastic tube, a
new check valve is needed in the handpiece waterline to prevent retraction of oral fluids during treatments. (Courtesy of
A-DEC, Inc. Newberg, Ore.)

fords the biofilm flora resistance to antimicrobial agents
on the order of 1500 times greater than normal freefloating bacteria. Because of this resistance to antimicrobial agents, once the biofilm is established, it is very
difficult to remove.
Bacterial growth in biofilms on the inner walls of dental unit water lines is a universal occurrence unless steps
are taken to control it." Counts of bacteria that are shed
from the biofilms into water of the dental unit may
range from thousands to hundreds of thousands of bacteria per milliliter. 1,13,84,110 This bioload could be compared with bacterial counts of some foods (e.g., juices,
milk, yogurt) except that the bacterial types present are
not carefully controlled. The main inhabitants are opportunistic, gram-negative, aquaphilic bacteria. Similar
species are found in biofilms that form in swimming
pools or wherever nonsterile water remains in prolonged contact with habitable surfaces. The bacteria may
include atypical Mycobacteria, Pseudomonas, and possibly Legionella bacteria, which can present an infection
risk to immunocompromised persons. 67,83,101,104 Flushing
or sterilizing high-speed handpieces cannot be expected
to overcome this potential source of contamination of
patients and personnel that extends throughout the
dental unit water system.
The public health threat of biofilm in dental unit waterlines has not been established. However, as the characteristics of the population changes, the link between
biofilm bacteria and infection may be verified. The ADA
recommended that IC measures be established and followed such that dental unit treatments would contain
less than 200 colony-forming units (cfu) per milliliter of
bacteria by the year 2000.111 Suggested mechanisms to
accomplish this goal of 200 cfu/ml include use of microbial point-of-use filters and independent water systems.
The uses of biocide solutions to treat the waterlines

CHAPTER

8

I nfection Control

solization of mycobacteria that cause pulmonary tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis) has always been a
concern, although an infectious patient coughing in the
waiting room or operatory is clearly much more likely
to infect others. Annual tuberculin testing of personnel
has been a standard IC recommendation in dentistry. There
is also concern about nosocomial airborne transmission of multidrug-resistant strains of mycobacteria that
have exhibited an 85% infection rate and have been
lethal for 75% of infected immunocompromised persons
in 16 weeks . This poses a concern for health of dental
personnel as well.
The rubber dam and high-volume evacuation (HVE) are
very important and helpful methods for reducing exposure to
contamination (see Chapter 10). FIVE can be up to 80%

FIG 8-20

A water reservoir can provide uncontaminated water to the syringe and to cool the high-speed bur if the reservoir and waterlines downstream are disinfected regularly.
(Courtesy of A-DEC, Inc., Newberg, Ore.)

overnight and as a continuous addition to the treatment
water also have been investigated . 127
Although much work is currently being done in the area
of the biofilm and dental unit water line contamination, one
has to be careful in selecting which system to use to control
the biofilm. Clean water reservoir systems combined with
disinfection or sterilization of equipment downstream
have been developed by several companies (Fig. 8-20).
Disinfectants, such as an iodophore or diluted sodium
hypochlorite, used to clean the system must then be
flushed out of the system with clean, boiled, or sterile water before use. Always remove the handpiece before disinfecting the system because 0.5% sodium hypochlorite
solution and other strong chemicals will damage the
high-speed handpiece and other metal products. Very dilute biocides that are used continuously in the treatment
water must be thoroughly researched because some of
them can decrease composite bond strengths to enamel
and dentin. 106 As stated earlier, once the biofilm is generated, it can be difficult to remove. Therefore, educating
dental personnel and periodically monitoring compliance with procedures is paramount for the success in
preventing dental unit waterline contamination."
CONTROL OF CONTAMINATION
FROM SPATTER AND AEROSOL
Concerns regarding contamination from spatter and
aerosol created by rotary equipment are valid. Operating this equipment in the mouths of patients spatters
oral fluids and microorganisms onto the attending clinical personnel, and aerosols can readily be inhaled. Aero-

effective in reducing aerosol contamination. However,
there is no way to completely eliminate airborne contamination, unless some method of continuous air purification can be used. Without the universal use of
personal barriers, drapes, and/or effective cleanup procedures, personnel, and subsequent patients can be subjected to oral fluid-borne contamination.
STERILIZATION OF HANDPIECES
AND RELATED ROTARY
EQUIPMENT
Prophy angles, latch angles, burs, and rotary stones used
in the mouth must be cleaned and sterilized for reuse.
All such items are readily sterilized by three or more
methods of sterilization. Carbon steel burs require special protection in the autoclave (see Sterilization of Burs
in Autoclave). Handpieces are semicritical instrumentation requiring sterilization. Few brands now exist on
the market that cannot be routinely autoclaved. Sterilization of handpieces must be monitored and documented.

The motor end of the attached low-speed handpiece can
be covered by pulling a disposable, single use, slender
plastic bag up over it and pushing (popping) the handpiece through the sealed end of the bag so the bag covers the motor end and part of the hose (see Fig. 8-9).
Otherwise scrub and disinfect the motor-end for each
reuse if it cannot be sterilized.
STEAM STERILIZATION OF HANDPIECES
Autoclave sterilization of handpieces is one of the most
rapid methods. If proper cleaning and lubricating is performed as prescribed by the manufacturer, good utility is
obtainable with regular autoclaving. Fiber optics dim
with repeated heat sterilization in a number of months to
a year, apparently due to oil residue and debris baked on
the ends of the optical fibers. Cleaning with detergent solution and wiping ends of optics with alcohol or other
suitable organic solvents may prolong use before factory
servicing. Manufacturers are improving methods of
preparing handpieces for sterilization. Consult the manufacturer's for current advice and warnings.

CHAPTER

Procedures for Handpieces With a Metal-Bearing
Turbine. Scrub metal-bearing high-speed handpieces

and the sheath or cone of the low-speed straight handpiece at the sink with running water and detergent.
See manufacturer's directions for further cleaning and
lubrication before and after sterilization. Bag the
handpiece and sheath and autoclave them. Note: when
first operating a freshly lubricated handpiece, keep it in a plastic bag or the sterilization bag to avoid breathing the vaporized lubricant.
Procedure for Handpieces With a "Lube-Free"
Ceramic-Bearing Turbine. Follow manufacturer's direc

tions for cleaning high-speed handpieces with lubrication-free ceramic-bearing turbine (Den-Tal-Ez, Inc., Lancaster, Pennsylvania). For this type of handpiece, avoid
using chemicals that will damage internal parts. Consult manufacturer's most current directions supplied
with each handpiece for preparation of handpieces for
sterilization. Attention to directions on cleaning fiber
optics at both ends of the handpiece (e.g., with isopropyl alcohol) will prolong service life. Bag and autoclave the handpiece.
OTHER METHODS OF
HANDPIECE STERILIZATION
Chemical vapor pressure sterilization recommended for
some types of handpieces apparently works well with
ceramic-bearing handpieces, yet may impair others.
Always obtain the handpiece manufacturer's recommendations.
Ethylene oxide (ETOX) gas is the gentlest method of
sterilization used for handpieces. Internal and external
cleaning are important. Otherwise, preparation of handpieces before sterilization is not as critical because no
heat is involved. In some types of ETOX sterilizers, gas
appears to penetrate high-speed handpieces. However,
oil left in handpieces can impair sterilization. Be sure to
confirm with the manufacturer that the sterilizer has
premarket review and approval from the FDA for sterilizing handpieces.
ETOX processing takes the handpiece out of circulation for several hours or overnight. Some practitioners
have purchased enough low-cost handpieces to treat
their maximum number of patients seen per day, and
use overnight ETOX sterilization. This approach may be
effective with adequate handpiece cleaning and disassembly. However, the FDA may not agree with use of
certain types of ETOX sterilizers for sterilizing handpieces. Further research on the effectiveness and any
limitations of ETOX handpiece sterilization still may be
needed. (Consult the manufacturer or Anderson Products, Haw River, North Carolina.)
Dry heat sterilization of handpieces is generally not
recommended. A rapid, high-temperature, dry heat disinfection process was under evaluation for handpieces.
Check with the handpiece manufacturer and the steril-

8

I nfection Control

izer manufacturer (Cox Sterilizer Co.) regarding use of
this process and obtain information regarding FDA review from the manufacturer.
I NFECTION CONTROL
FOR IMPRESSIONS AND
RELATED REGISTRATIONS

FACTORS IN MAKING IMPRESSIONS AND
ASSOCIATED REGISTRATIONS THAT WILL
BE SENT TO A REMOTE LABORATORY
Precautions are required for IC in making impressions
and associated bite registrations, just as for other operative procedures. Universally apply barrier protection for
personnel against contamination from mucosa, saliva,
and blood by use of adequate PPE, such as gloves, mask,
and appropriate overgarment.
To eliminate any chance of cross-contamination when
sizing impression trays, place the tray in a plastic baggy
before it is tried in the mouth. After the appropriate size
has been determined, remove the baggy and proceed
with impression making. Indicate the tray size on the
patient's chart to eliminate further try-ins.
For IC, custom resin trays for impressions made with
nonaqueous rubber impression materials are used once
and then discarded. Likewise, stock trays are used only
once and discarded.
Before making the impression and associated bite registrations, use clean, gloved hands to dispense as many
materials and disposable items as possible. This avoids
contaminating their containers. Whenever possible, use
unit dose packaged materials, or use a paper towel or
plastic film to handle tubes and other reused containers.
Least satisfactory, but adequate, is wiping material containers with a disinfectant after the procedures. A satisfactory disinfectant should be an EPA-approved tuberculocidal disinfectant.
CONCEPTS FOR TRANSPORTING IMPRESSIONS
AND ASSOCIATED REGISTRATIONS
TO A REMOTE LABORATORY
For transport to a remote laboratory, impressions and
associated bite registrations are regulated by OSHA's
specifications for handling and transporting specimens
of blood or other potentially infectious materials (OPIM)
such as blood-contaminated saliva: "Potentially infectious materials shall be placed in a container which prevents leakage during collection, handling, processing,
storage, transport, or shipping (to the laboratory). Labeling or color coding is required when such specimens/
containers leave the facility.""
Controversy exists over two choices that may be used
for preparing a potentially infectious item for transport:
(1) send it well cleaned (rinsed) and undisinfected in a
biohazard-labeled, heat-sealed, plastic bag; or (2) debride, clean (rinse), and adequately disinfect it, place it

CHAPTER

8

I nfection Control

in a sealed transport bag labeled with the precautions
taken, and assume responsibility for the aseptic condition of the item. In either case, most laboratories will
disinfect the item (a second time in the second choice) to
ensure protection of laboratory personnel. Disinfecting
twice is time wasted, and multiple exposures to disinfectant should be avoided . 85 The simplest and best approach may be the first. It avoids confusion over
whether the item (e.g., an impression) is properly disinfected in the office, saves office time and materials for
disinfection, and removes office liability. Special labeling of the item regarding potential contamination is not
necessary (except for always having the OSHA biohazard label) if no item is disinfected and every item is assumed infected (thus satisfying the concept of universal
precautions). This was the choice adopted in 1992 by the
Washington State Department of Health Dental Disciplinary Board. 124 Satisfactory labeling requires that the prescription include the type of impression material. The
National Association of Dental Laboratories recommends disinfecting all items received from the dental office and disinfecting all appliances before shipping
them from the laboratory 94
Inexpensive, biohazard-labeled, heat-sealable bags are
commercially available in various sizes made of sturdy
clear plastic, and they are stamped with warnings to
transporters and personnel (e.g., Seal-A-Case, Infection
Control Services, Inc., P O. Box 1389, Kent, WA 98035)
(Fig. 8-21). The U.S. Postal Service also has specifications for double, leak-proof packaging and external labeling of such packaging if contaminated items must be
sent by the U.S. Postal Service. Similar bags also are
available for returning finished items to the office. They
have no biohazard labels, but provide stamped instructions in green lettering advising office personnel that
the contents are precleaned and disinfected, and to handle the enclosed items appropriately for delivery to the
patient (Fig. 8-22). Generic, heat-sealable bags are available but must be appropriately labeled.
Procedures for Handling and Transporting Silicone
( Vinyl Polysiloxane) or Rubber-Based Impression Material and Any Associated Registrations to a Remote
Laboratory. IC procedures regarding the nonaqueous
rubber impression and any associated registration are as
follows:
1. Before the patient appointment, prepare one or more
industrially clean, strong, clear, heat-sealable, biohazard-labeled plastic bag(s) of appropriate size, one
for containing the scheduled impression and a separate one for any associated interocclusal registration.
(Do not place any other item along with an impression in a bag to prevent the possibility of pressuredeformation of the impression caused by the additional item). Place each bag into an open canister of
suitable size so that the bag's open end extends above

FIG B-21

The dentist or dental assistant prepares a potentially
i nfectious impression for transport (to remote laboratory or to
on-site laboratory) by rinsing the impression and then placing
it in a biohazard-labeled plastic bag without contaminating the
bag's outer surface.

the rim of the supporting canister, allowing a slight
folding downward and outward of the bag's open
edge. This helps keep it open and also prevents contamination of the bag's outer surface during insertion
of the item.
2. Remove the impression, interocclusal registration, or
device from the mouth, and while still wearing barriers (gowns, gloves, and so on) remove any attached
debris and rinse the item well with running tap water for 15 seconds to remove saliva and blood.

CHAPTER

8

I nfection Control

ratory has different requirements. Place the bag(s)
into a suitable box and send it to the remote laboratory. Laboratory personnel will proceed with disinfecting the items sent. Treat all potentially infectious
items alike. Laboratory precautions and disinfection
should be the same whether a patient has an infection
or not. Only if a laboratory person has an exposure incident should the patient's history become important.
If the nonaqueous rubber impression is to be poured
in the dental office, the impression must be disinfected
before the cast is formed.
Procedures for Handling and Transporting Items
From an Aqueous Impression Material Technique (Usi ng Alginate [Irreversible Hydrocolloid], Reversible
Hydrocolloid, or Polyether Impressions) and Any Associated Registrations to a Remote Laboratory. If
the aqueous impression is to be poured in-office and
the resultant cast and associated items transported to a
remote laboratory, IC procedures are as follows:

FIG.8-22 The laboratory disinfects appliance and then transports it in a heat-sealed bag to the dentist.
3. After rinsing, and while still wearing barriers, place
the impression (or other item) into the designated,
prepared bag without touching the bag's outer
surface.
4. Now, remove the gloves because they are contaminated. With clean hands, close the bag while touching
only the bag's clean outer surface, and heat-seal it.
5. Tape the prescription to the bag.
6. Attach a note or use a bag appropriately lettered to
alert the laboratory that the item(s) in the bag was
(were) debrided and rinsed, but not disinfected. Communication with laboratory personnel also can state
that this is how any item will be sent unless the labo-

1. Thoroughly rinse the impression under tap water
(15 seconds recommended) to remove any saliva or
blood. Handle the impression carefully to prevent
distortion.
2. Disinfect the impression by spraying until thoroughly
soaked with a hospital level disinfectant. The product
with the shortest contact time allows less distortion.
An acceptable alternative is to follow the manufacturer's recommendation for a particular disinfectant.
3. With clean hands, thoroughly rinse the disinfected
impression under tap water to avoid prolonged exposure to the disinfectant and because any residual
disinfectant can adversely affect surface hardness of
the stone cast.
4. Shake excess water from the impression and pour the
cast immediately. One reversible hydrocolloid manufacturer (Van R, 600 E. Hueneme Rd., Oxnard, CA
93033) offers two alternatives to immediate pouring
of the impression after disinfection: (1) submerge the
impression into a 2% potassium sulfate solution for
(up to) 20 minutes, and then remove, shake off excess,
and pour the impression; (2) place the impression
into a humidor (for up to 4 hours with no temperature change), remove, submerge into the 2% potassium sulfate solution for 20 minutes, remove, shakeoff excess, and pour the impression. (To make the
potassium sulfate solution, Van R supplies the crystals and instructs the user to dissolve one capful of
crystals to 1 pint of water.)
5. The cast from a disinfected impression does not need
disinfecting.
6. Carefully package the cast for shipment to the remote
laboratory; associated items (such as an interocclusal
registration) that are from the mouth, must be rinsed,
disinfected, and then rinsed again. These may then

CHAPTER

8

I nfection Control

be shipped along with the cast, but packaged to
avoid harming it. Include also a written note stating
that the impression and associated registration were
disinfected and that the cast should not be subjected
to a disinfection procedure that might compromise
accuracy.
If the dentist desires to utilize a nearby commercial
laboratory (having expeditious courier service) for pickup of the aqueous impression and associated items, and
for the disinfection and subsequent handling of these
items, the IC procedures described in the previous section should be followed.

PROCEDURES FOR HANDLING IMPRESSIONS
AND ASSOCIATED REGISTRATIONS FOR AN
ON-SITE LABORATORY
Laboratory personnel are required to wear a clean uniform or laboratory jacket, coat, or gown, and the dentist
supplies these. Disposable mask, protective eyewear,
and protective gloves also are supplied, and their use is
required when there is potential for exposure to dust or
spatter.
Convey impressions and associated items removed
from the mouth to the on-site laboratory technician using the same procedures described in the previous section (for transport to a remote laboratory). These procedures should maintain the outside surfaces of the bag in
an uncontaminated condition, as well as protect the
contents from accidental spillage.
Additional IC measures for handling these items in
the on-site laboratory are as follows:
1. A designated area must be available to receive the
items. Personnel receiving them must wear disposable treatment gloves.
2. All incoming items to the dental laboratory must be
properly labeled. With gloved hands, disinfect impressions (and associated registrations) by submerging (for 10 minutes) in 1:10 dilution (0.5%) of
household liquid chlorine bleach (5.25% sodium
hypochlorite) prepared fresh daily, or other accepted tuberculocidal disinfectant. As long as blood
is not visible, containers can then be discarded in
regular trash.
3. With gloved hands, spray articulators and any related equipment that have been contaminated, and
which cannot be sterilized, with an alcohol disinfectant (see Operatory Asepsis) because chlorine in the
hypochlorite-type disinfectant may damage the metal.
4. With clean hands, thoroughly rinse the impression
under tap water (15 seconds) to remove any residual
disinfectant, and follow manufacturer's directions
for any additional procedures for treating the impression and forming the cast.

5. All outgoing items must be properly cleaned and
placed in a leakproof bag or appropriate container
before leaving the laboratory.
6. Contaminated countertops and work surfaces must
be cleaned of debris and disinfected daily. After cleaning, spray surfaces with disinfectant, wipe dry with
paper towels, and respray with disinfectant. Leave
surfaces wet.
When repairing or polishing intraoral appliances, do
not use the same pumice for new work and repair work.
For repairs, wear protective gloves. Premeasure pumice
in small amounts (e.g., on small disposable paper or
plastic trays); discard after use. Wet pumice with a mixture of green soap and a disinfectant. Do not use water only.
After using pumice in a repair, disinfect the appliance
again for 10 minutes. Disinfect model trimmers and pumice pans at the end of the day. 108 Maintain an adequate
supply of wheels for repairs so they can be sterilized
with steam in an autoclave before reuse. Disinfectants
cannot be expected to adequately prepare them for safe
reuse. 8,57,86,94

SUMMARY AND OTHER
I NFORMATION SOURCES
It is not possible in one chapter, even as comprehensive as
this, to provide all the detail on disease updates, tests,
vaccines, barriers, SOPs, sterilization methods, and
equipment. IC and auxiliary persons are referred to other
more detailed literature and texts in the reference list, and
are advised to attend continuing education programs to
expand and update their IC information. 5,38,39,48,89,129
REFERENCES
1. Abel LC et al: Studies on dental aerobiology. IV: Bacterial
contamination of water delivered by dental units, J Dent Res
50:1567-1569, 1971.
2. Ahtone J, Goodman RA: Hepatitis B and dental personnel:
transmission to patients and prevention issues, J Am Dent
Assoc 106(2):219-222, 1983.
3. Allain J-P et al: Long-term evaluation of HIV antigen and
antibodies to p 24 and p 41 in patients with hemophilia,
N Engl J Med 317:1114-1121, 1987.
4. Allen A, Bryan R: Occult blood accumulation under fingernails, J Am Dent Assoc 105:358-362, Sept 1982.
5. American Dental Association: Infection control for the dental office and dental laboratory, J Am Dent Assoc 123(suppl):
1-8, Aug 1992.
6. American Dental Association: Facts about AIDS for the dental team, ed 3, J Am Dent Assoc 119(suppl):1-9, July 1991.
7. Association of Dental Schools: Recommended clinical
guidelines for infection control in dental education institutions, J Dent Educ 55:621-630, 1991.
8. Association of Dental Schools: Curriculum guidelines for the
dental care management of patients with bloodborne infectious diseases, J Dent Educ 55:609-619, 1991.
9. Autio KK et al: Studies on cross-contamination in the dental office, J Am Dent Assoc 100 (3):358-361, 1980.

CHAPTER 8

10. Bagga BSR et al: Contamination of dental unit cooling water with oral microorganisms and its prevention, J Am Dent
Assoc 109:712-716, 1984.
11. Bednarsh HS, Eklunk KJ, Mills S: Check your dental unit
water IQ Dent Assist 5-8, Jan-Feb 1997.
12. Bentley CD, Burkhart NW, Crawford JJ: Evaluating spatter
and aerosol contamination during dental procedures, J Am
Dent Assoc 125:579-584, May 1994.
13. Blake GC: The incidence and control of bacterial infection in
dental spray reservoirs, Br Dent J 115:413-416, 1963.
14. Bond VVW et al: Effective use of liquid chemical germicides
on medical instruments: instrument design problems. In
Block SS, editor: Disinfection, sterilization, and preservation, ed
4, Philadelphia, 1991, Lea & Febiger.
15. Bond WW et al: Inactivation of hepatitis B by intermediate
to high-level disinfectant chemicals, J Clin Microbiol 18:
535-538,1983.
16. Bond WW et al: Survival of hepatitis B virus after drying and
storage for one week, Lancet 7:550-551, March 1981.
17. Burkhart NW, Crawford JJ: Critical steps after cleaning: removing debris after sonication, JAm Dent Assoc 128: 456-463,
1997.
18. Centers for Disease Control: HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report
10(2):26,1998.
19. Centers For Disease Control: Recommendations for prevention and control of hepatitis C virus (HCV) Infection and
HCV-related chronic disease, MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly
Rep 47(No. RR-19):1-39,1998.
20. Centers for Disease Control: Public health service guidelines
for the management of health-care worker exposures to
HIV and recommendations for postexposure prophylaxis,
MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 47(No. RR-7):1-34, 1998.
21. Centers for Disease Control: Surveillance for occupationally
acquired HIV infection-United States, 1981-1982, MMWR
Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 41 (No. 43):823-825, 1992.
22. Centers for Disease Control: Nosocomial transmission of
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis among HIV-infected
persons-Florida and NewYork, 1988-1991. MMWR Morbid
Mortal Wkly Rep 40:585-591,1991.
23. Centers for Disease Control: Recommendations for preventing transmission of human immunodeficiency virus and
hepatitis B virus to patients during exposure prone invasive
procedures, MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 40(RR-8):1-9,
1991.
24. Centers for Disease Control: Update: acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, United States, 1981-1991, MMWR Morbid
Mortal Wkly Rep 40(No. 22):358-368, 1991.
25. Centers for Disease Control: Update: transmission of HIV
infection during invasive dental procedure-Florida, MMWR
Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 40(No.2):21-28, 1991.
26. Centers for Disease Control: Guidelines for preventing transmission of tuberculosis in health-care settings, with special
focus on HIV related issues, MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly
Rep 39(RR17):1-29, 1990.
27. Centers for Disease Control: Measles-United States, 1990,
MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 40(No. 22):369-372,1990.
28. Centers for Disease Control: Guidelines for prevention of
transmission of HIV and HBV to health care and public
safety workers, MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 38(No. S-6),
1989.
29. Centers for Disease Control: Update: Universal precautions
for prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency
virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne pathogens in

30.

31.

32.
33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.
40.

41.

42.

43.

44.
45.

46.

47.

48.

I nfection Control

health-care settings, MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 37:
377-387, 1988.
Centers for Disease Control: Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health-care settings, MMWR
Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 36(suppl 2S):1S-18s, 1987.
Centers for Disease Control: Recommended infectioncontrol practices for dentistry, MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly
Rep 35 (No. 15):237-242, 1986.
Centers for Disease Control: Measles on a college campusOhio, MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 34(7):89-90,1985.
Centers for Disease Control, Immunization Practices Advisory Committee: Recommendation of the Immunization
Practices Advisory Committee: Protection against viral hepatitis, MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 39(No. S-2):1-26,1990.
Centers for Disease Control, Immunization Practices Advisory Committee: Measles prevention: recommendations of
the Immunologic Practices Committee, MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 38: (S-9), 1989.
Centers for Disease Control, Immunization Practices Advisory Committee: Recommendations for protection against
viral hepatitis, MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 34 (22):314,
1985.
Centers for Disease Control, Immunization Practices Advisory Committee: Inactivated hepatitis B virus vaccine, MMWR
Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 31:317-328,1982.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Update: investigations of persons treated by HIV-infected health-care
workers-United States, MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep
42(No. 17):329-337,1993.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Update: recommended infection-control practices for dentistry, MMWR
Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 142(No. RR-8):1-12,1993.
Christensen RP: Ultrasonic cleaning equipment, Clin Res Assoc Newsletter 13(No. 8):1-3, Aug 1989.
Christensen RP et al: Efficiency of 42 brands of face masks
and two face shields in preventing inhalation of airborne
debris, Gen Dent 39:414-421, 1991.
Christensen RP et al: Antimicrobial activity of environmental surface disinfectants in the absence and presence of
bioburden, J Am Dent Assoc 119:493-504, 1989.
Cochran MA, Miller CH, Sheldrake MA: The efficiency of
the rubber dam as a barrier to the spread of microorganisms
during dental treatment, JAm DentAssoc 119:141-144,1989.
Cottone JA: Recent developments in hepatitis: new virus,
vaccine and dosage recommendations, J Am Dent Assoc 120:
501-508,1990.
Cottone JA, Terezhalmy GT, Molinari JA, editors: Practical infection control in dentistry. Philadelphia, 1991, Lea & Febiger.
Council on Dental Materials, Instruments and Devices,
American Dental Association: Dental units and water retraction, J Am Dent Assoc 116:417-420, 1988.
Council on Dental Therapeutics, Council on Dental Materials Instruments and Equipment, American Dental Association: Monograph series on dental materials and therapeutics:
safety and infection control in the dental office, Chicago, 1990,
American Dental Association.
Council on Dental Therapeutics, Council on Dental Practice,
Council on Dental Materials Instruments and Equipment,
American Dental Association: Infection control recommen
dations for the dental office and dental laboratory, JAm Dent
Assoc 116:241-248, 1988.
Crawford JJ: Clinical asepsis in dentistry: regulations, infection
control, Chapel Hill, NC, 1992, CIC Publishing Co.

CHAPTER 8

I nfection Control

49. Crawford JJ: State of the art: practical infection control in
dentistry. In Mitchell E, Cottone J, editors: Proceedings of
the National Symposium on hepatitis B and the dental profession, J Am Dent Assoc 110:629-633, 1985.
50. Crawford JJ: Sterilization, disinfection, and asepsis in dentistry. In Block SS, editor: Disinfection, sterilization, and preservation, Philadelphia, 1983, Lea & Febiger.
51. Crawford JJ, Broderius C: Evaluation of a dental unit designed to prevent retraction of oral fluids. Quintessence Int 21:
47-51, 1989.
52. Crawford JJ, Broderius C: Control of cross infection risks in
the dental operatory: prevention of water retraction by bur
cooling spray systems. J Am Dent Assoc 116:695-687, 1988.
53. Crawford JJ, Fine J: Infection control in hospital dentistry. In
Zambito R: Hospital dentistry, St Louis, 1997, Mosby.
54. DeVitaVT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, editors: AIDS etiology, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention, Philadelphia, 1985,
JB Lippincott Co.
55. DiMaggio SL: State regulation and the HIV-positive health
care professional: a response to a problem that does not exist, Am J Law Med 19:497-521, 1995
56. Ehrenkranz NJ, Alfanso BC: Failure of bland soap handwash
to prevent hand transfer of patient bacteria to urethral catheters, Inf Cont Hosp Epid 12:654-662, 1991.
57. Favero MS, Bond WW: Chemical disinfection of medical
materials. In Block SS, editor: Disinfectiuon, sterilization, and
preservation, ed 4, Philadelphia 1991, Lea & Febiger.
58. Federal law 42 U.S. Code Section #300, ee-2 (Oct. 28, 1991).
59. Food and Drug Administration: Medical devices: patient examination and surgeons' gloves; adulteration. Final Rule,
21CFR Part 800. Federal Register 55 (No. 239):51254-52158,
Dec 12, 1990.
60. Forbes B: Acquisition of cytomegalovirus infection: an update, Clin Microbiol Rev 2:204-216,1989.
61. Francis D, Favero MS, Maynard JE: Transmission of hepatitis
B virus, Semin Liver Dis 1(1):27-32, 1981.
62. Francis D et al.: Occurrence of hepatitis A, B, non-A/non-B
in the United States, Am J Med 76:69, Jan 1984.
63. Friedland GH, Klein RS: Transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus, N Engl J Med 317:1125-1135, 1987.
64. Garner JS, Favero MS: Guideline for handwashing and hospital environmental control (HHS Pub. No.99-1117), Atlanta,
1985, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control.
65. Gayle HD et al: Prevalence of the human immunodeficiency
virus among university students, N Engl J Med 323:
1538-1541,1990.
66. Glasel M: High-risk sexual practices in the transmission of
AIDS. In DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, editors:
AIDS etiology, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention, Philadelphia, 1985, JB Lippincott.
67. Gold J: Mycobacterial infections in immunosuppressed patients, Semin Resp Inf 13:160-165, 1986.
68. Greene WC: The molecular biology of human immunodeficiency virus type 1, N Engl J Med 324:308-317, 1991.
69. Greenspan D, Greenspan CA, Winkler JR: Diagnosis and
management of oral manifestations of HIV infection and
AIDS, Infect Dis Clin North Am 2:373-385, 1988.
70. Gwaltney JM Jr, Hendley JO: Transmission of experimental
rhinovirus infection by contaminated surfaces, Am J Epidemiol 116:828-833, 1989.
71. Hackney RW: Using a biological indicator to detect potential sources of cross-contamination in the dental operatory,
J Am Dent Assoc 129:1567-1577, Nov 1998.

72. Hadler SC et al: Long-term immunogenicity and efficacy of
hepatitis B vaccine in homosexual men, N Engl J Med 315:
209-214,1986.
73. Hamed LM et al: Hibiclens keratitis, Am J Ophthalmol 104:
50-56, 1987.
74. Klein RS, Freeman K Taylor PE, Stevens CE: Occupational
risk for hepatitis C virus infection among New York City
dentists, Lancet 338(8782-8783):1539-1542, 1991.
75. Klein RS et al: Low occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus infection among dental professionals, N Engl J
Med 318:86-90,1988.
76. Klein RC, Party E, Gershey EL: Virus penetration of examination gloves, Biotechniques 9:196-199, 1990.
77. Lange J, Goudsmit J: Decline of antibody reactivity to HIV
core protein secondary to increased production of HIV antigen, Lancet 19, Feb 19, 1987.
78. Lettau LA: The A,B,C,D, and E of viral hepatitis: Spelling out
the risks for health care workers, Inf Cont Hosp Epidemiol 13:
77-81, 1992.
79. Lewis DL, Arens M, Appleton SS, et al: Cross-contamination potential with dental equipment, Lancet 340:1252-1254,
Nov 21, 1992.
80. Lewis DL, Boe RK: Cross-infection risks associated with
current procedures for using high-speed dental handpieces.
J Clin Microbiol 30:401-406, 1992.
81. Lo K-J et al: Long-term immunogenicity and efficacy of
hepatitis B vaccine in infants born to HBeAg-positive
HBsAg-carrier mothers, Hepatology 8:1647-1650, 1988.
82. Manzella JP: An outbreak of herpes simplex virus type 1
gingivostomatitis in a dental hygiene practice, )AMA 252:
2019-2022,1984.
83. Martin MV: The significance of the bacterial contamination
of dental unit water systems, Br Dent J 163:152-154, 1987.
84. McEntegart MG, Clark A: Colonization of dental units with
water bacteria, Br Dent 1134:140-142, 1973.
85. Merchant VA: Infection control in the dental laboratory:
concerns for the dentist, Compend Contin Educ Dent 14:
(3)382-391, 1993.
86. MerchantVA, Molinari JA, Sabes WR: Herpetic whitlow: report of a case with multiple recurrences, Oral Surg 55:
568-571,1983.
87. Meskin LH: HIV update: misinformation persists, JAm Dent
Assoc 130(soft):1260-1261, 1999.
88. Micik RE et al: Studies on aerobiology. I: Bacterial aerosols
generated during dental procedures, J Dent Res 48:49-56,1969.
89. Miller CH, Palenik CJ: Infection control and management of
hazardous materials for the dental team, ed 2, St Louis, 1998,
Mosby.
90. Miller RL, Micik RE: Air pollution and its control in the dental office, Dent Clin North Am 22:453, 1978.
91. Mitchell E: ADA Council recommends hepatitis vaccine for
dentists, students, and auxiliary personnel, ADA News 13:1,
Aug 8, 1982.
92. Molinari JA: How to choose and use environmental surface
disinfectants. In Cottone JA, Terezhalmy GT, Molinari JA,
editors: Practical infection control in dentistry, Baltimore, 1996,
Williams & Wilkins.
93. Moriarty JD, Crawford JJ: Evaluation of an independent sterile water reservoir system for highspeed instrumentation
(abstract No. 855), J Dent Res 55, 1976.
94. National Association of Dental Laboratories: A complete program of infection control for dental laboratories, Alexandria,VA,
1989, National Association of Dental Laboratories.

CHAPTER 8

95. Occupational Safety and Health Administration: Bloodbome
pathogens (Section 1910, 1030 [26 U.S.C. 635]), Federal Register 56(235):64175-64181, 1991.
96. Occupational Safety and Health Administration: Hazard
Communications Standard, Federal Register, Aug 24, 1987.
97. Organization for Safety & Asepsis Procedures: Disease update: hepatitis C, Focus 8:1-4, 1998.
98. Palenik CJ et al: A survey of sterilization practices in selected
endodontic offices, J Endodont 12:206-209, 1986.
99. Pattison CP et al: Epidemic hepatitis B in a clinical laboratory: possible association with computer card handling, jAm
Dent Assoc 230:854-857,1974.
100. Peterson NJ, Bond WW, Favero MS: Air sampling for hepatitis B surface antigen in a dental operatory, J Am Dent Assoc
99:465-467, 1979.
101. Polinsky B: Clean dental unit water reservoir to control mycobacteria and aquaphilic bacteria, Control 5:5, 1990.
102. Poole P, Summers T, Crawford JJ: Comparison of ultrasonic
versus swabbing methods to evaluate handpiece disinfection,
Control 6:4, 1991.
103. Raloff J: Successful hepatitis A vaccine debuts, Science News
142:103, 1992.
104. Reinthaler FF, Ascher FM, Stunzer D: Serologic examination
for antibodies against Legionella species in dental personnel, J Dent Res 67:942-943, 1988.
105. Robinson RAN et al: A suspension method to determine
reuse life of chemical disinfectants during clinical use, Appl
Microbial 54:158-164, 1988.
106. Roberts HW et al: Dental waterline antimicrobials' effect on
dentin shear bond strength (abstract no. 1011), J Dent Res
78:232, 1999.
107. Rutala WA, Cole EC: Ineffectiveness of hospital disinfectants against bacteria, a collaborative study, Infect Control 8:
501-506,1987.
108. Sabatini B: Keeping the laboratory clean and safe; how to
prevent cross-contamination, Dental Teamwork 4(No. 6):2324,1991.
109. Satter SA, Springthorpe VS: Survival and disinfectant inactivation of the human immunodeficiency virus: a critical review, Rev Infect Dis 1(13):430-447, 1991.
110. Sawyer DR et al: Bacterial contamination of the highspeed
dental handpiece and the water it delivers, Virginia Dent J
53:14-23,1976.
111. Shearer B: ADA statement on dental unit waterlines, J Am
Dent Assoc 127:185-189, 1996.
112. Slade JS et al: The survival of human immunodeficiency virus
in water, sewage, and sea water, Water Science and Technology
21:55-59, 1989.
113. Soulsby ME, Barnett JB, Maddox S: Brief report: the antiseptic efficiency of chlorxylenol-containing vs. chlorhexi-

I nfection Control

dine gluconate-containing surgical scrub preparations, Infect
Control 7:223-226, 1986.
114. Spire B et al: Inactivation of lymphadenopathy-associated
virus by heat, gamma rays, and ultraviolet light, Lancet
188-189, Jan 26, 1985.
115. Stubbs B et al: A quantitative biological assay to evaluate
presterilization cleaning methods, Transmissions: Society for
Inf Cent in Dent 7:4, 1992.
116. Summers T, Poole P, Crawford J: Statistical evaluation of
cleaning methods and chemicals for disinfecting handpieces,
Transmissions: Society for Infect Control in Dent 6:2, 1991.
117. Takata Y et al: Hepatitis G virus in a high-risk subgroup of
hospitalized dental patients, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Path
Oral Radiol Ended 4:442-445, 1999.
118. Taylor TL, Leonard RH, Mauriello SM, et al: Effect of DUWL
biocides on enamel bond strengths (abstract no. 237), J Dent
Res 77:135, 1998.
119. Thomas DL et al: Occupational risk of hepatitis C infections
among general dentists and oral surgeons in North America, Am J Med 100:41-45, 1996.
120. Thomas LE et al: Survival of herpes simplex and other selected microorgansisms on patient charts: potential source
of infection, j Am Dent Assoc 111:462-464, 1985.
121. U.S. Congress: Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970,
Sections 6 and 8, (29 U. S. C. 655, 657), CFR Part 1911 and
Sec. of Labor's Orders Nos. 9-83 (48 FR 35736) and 29 CFR
Part 1910, 1970.
122. U.S. Department of Labor, OSHA, Controlling occupational
exposure to bloodborne pathogens in dentistry, Washington DC,
1992, US Government Printing Office.
123. Wainwright RB et al: Duration of immunogenicity and efficacy of hepatitis B vaccine inYupik Eskimo population, JAMA
261:2362-2366, 1989.
124. Washington State Department of Health, Dental Disciplinary
Board: Small business economic impact statement, Infect
Control 246-816-720, March 3, 1992.
125. Whitacre RJ, Robins SK, Crawford JJ: Dental Asepsis, Seattle,
Wash, 1979, Stoma.
126. White SC, Glaze S: Interpatient microbial cross-contamination after dental radiographic exam, J Am Dent Assoc
96:801-804,1978.
127. Williams JF, Andrews N, Santiago JI: Microbial contamination of dental unit waterlines: Current preventive measures
and emerging options, Compend Contin Edu Dent 17(7):691708,1996
128. Williams N, Shay DE, Hasler JF: Indications of the sanitation level in a dental clinic, J Balt Coll Dent Surg 31:18-34,
1976.
129. Wood PR, editor: Cross infection control in dentistry, Aylesbury, England, 1992, Wolf Publishing.

I.

II.

Patient assessment, 389
A. Infection control, 389
B. Chief complaint, 389
C. Medical review, 389
1. Communicable diseases, 392
2. Allergies or medications, 399
3. Systemic diseases and cardiac
abnormalities, 399
4. Physiologic changes associated with
aging, 399
D. Sociologic and psychologic review, 400
E. Dental history, 400
F. Risk assessment, 400
Examination and diagnosis, 401
A. General considerations, 402
1. Charting and records, 402
2. Tooth denotation system, 402
3. Preparation for clinical examination, 405
4. Interpretation and use of diagnostic
tests, 405
B. Examination of orofacial soft tissues, 406
C. Examination of teeth and restorations, 406
1. Clinical examination for caries, 406
2. Clinical examination of amalgam
restorations, 409
3. Clinical examination of cast
restorations, 410
4. Clinical examination of composite and
other tooth-colored restorations, 411
5. Clinical examination for additional
defects, 411
6. Radiographic examination of teeth and
restorations, 412
7. Adjunctive aids for examining teeth and
restorations, 414
D. Review of periodontium, 416
1. Clinical examination, 416
2. Radiographic examination, 417

I II.

I V.

E. Examination of occlusion, 417
F. Examination of the patient in pain, 418
Treatment planning, 421
A. General considerations, 421
B. Treatment plan sequencing, 422
1. Urgent phase, 422
2. Control phase, 422
3. Reevaluation phase, 422
4. Definitive phase, 422
5. Maintenance phase, 422
C. Interdisciplinary considerations in operative
treatment planning, 422
1. Endodontics, 422
2. Periodontics, 422
3. Orthodontics, 423
4. Oral surgery, 423
5. Occlusion, 423
6. Fixed and removable prosthodontics, 423
D. Indications for operative treatment, 423
1. Operative preventive treatment, 423
2. Restoration of incipient lesions, 424
3. Esthetic treatment, 424
4. Treatment of abrasion, erosion, and
attrition, 424
5. Treatment of root-surface caries, 424
6. Treatment of root-surface sensitivity, 425
7. Repairing and resurfacing existing
restorations, 425
8. Replacement of existing restorations, 425
9. Indications for amalgam restorations, 425
10. Indications for direct composite and other
tooth-colored restorations, 425
11. Indications for indirect tooth-colored
restorations, 426
12. Indications for cast metal restorations, 426
E. Treatment plan approval, 426
Summary, 426

CHAPTER 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

Pretreatment considerations consisting of patient assessment, examination and diagnosis, and treatment
planning are the foundation of sound dental care. These
considerations follow a stepwise progression as the diagnosis and treatment plan depend on thorough assessment and examination of the patient.
Planning of dental treatment is a challenging and rewarding undertaking for the dentist. This endeavor is
no longer the sole province of the treating dentist, however. Heightened consumer awareness and interest in
personal health has resulted in increased participation
by the patient in decisions about treatment. The financing of nearly one half of dental care in the United States
by private dental insurance 30 also has prompted thirdparty payers' interest in treatment decisions.
Growing attention to using only the most effective and
appropriate treatment has spawned interest in numerous activities. For example, research, providing knowledge of what treatments work best in certain situations,
is expanding the knowledge base of dentistry.' This has
led to an interest in translating results of research into
practice activities and hopefully enhanced care for patients. This movement has been termed evidence-based
dentistry, which is defined as the "conscientious, explicit,
and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients. "54 It is anticipated that the systematic reviews that emerge from
the focus on evidence-based dentistry will provide practitioners with a distillation of the available knowledge
about various conditions and treatments. As evidencebased dentistry continues to expand, professional associations will become more active in the development of
guidelines and parameters that will assist dentists and
their patients in making informed and appropriate decisions. Currently, the American Dental Association and
other specialty associations have begun promulgating
practice parameters that can be used for this purpose.
The first section of this chapter describes several aspects of patient assessment that includes a review of the
patient's chief complaint, medical condition and history,
sociologic and psychologic conditions, dental history,
and an evaluation of the patient's risk for dental disease.
The second section, devoted to examination and diagnosis, reviews the clinical examination of orofacial soft
tissues, clinical and radiographic examinations of teeth
and periodontium, and clinical examination of the occlusion. The second section also reviews special considerations for the examination of a patient in pain. A brief
discussion of the need for and characteristics of informed
consent also is included in the second section. The final
section discusses types of treatment plans, indications for
operative treatment, and sequencing of dental procedures with an emphasis on interdisciplinary aspects of
treatment planning.
Three pretreatment considerations-medical review,
examination, and diagnosis-are necessary during each

of the initial, emergency, reevaluation, and recall visits.
The routine initial visit involves obtaining detailed information for treatment planning. An emergency visit requires collecting basic information and then focusing on
the patient's chief complaint. A reevaluation appointment
requires updating patient information and evaluating
previous treatment. In contrast, a recall appointment demands reviewing the patient assessment information
and comparing the patient's current status with previous conditions. Regardless of the type of visit, however,
the dentist must routinely evaluate the patient's systemic condition, along with the status of the teeth, periodontium, occlusion, and facial structures.
Pretreatment assessment must be thorough and systematic. The results of this assessment must be recorded
accurately in the patient record. Accurate records are
maintained for proper patient care and for medical, legal, and forensic purposes.
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
I NFECTION CONTROL
Before the examination and diagnosis of teeth, periodontium, and orofacial soft tissues, attention is given
to infection control (IC), the patient's chief complaint,
medical review, sociologic and psychologic review, dental history, and risk assessment.
Before, during, and after any patient visit, appropriate IC measures must be instituted. For this information
the reader is referred to Chapter 8.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
Before initiating any treatment, it is important to determine the patient's chief complaint, or the problem that
initiated the patient's visit. Record the complaint verbatim in the dental record. The patient should be encouraged and guided to discuss all aspects of the current
problem, including onset, duration, symptoms, and related factors. This information is vital to establish the
need for specific diagnostic tests and to determine the
cause and treatment of the complaint.
MEDICAL REVIEW
The patient or legal guardian completes a standard,
comprehensive medical history form (Fig. 9-1). This form
is the focus of the preexamination patient interview,
which helps identify conditions that could alter, complicate, or contraindicate proposed dental procedures. For
instance, the practitioner may identify: (1) communicable
diseases that require special precautions, procedures, or
referral; (2) allergies or medications that may contraindicate the use of certain drugs; (3) systemic diseases and cardiac abnormalities that demand less strenuous procedures
or prophylactic antibiotic coverage; and (4) physiologic
changes associated with aging that may alter clinical presentation and influence treatment. The practitioner also

CHAPTER9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

f I G . 9-1 A comprehensive medical review form is the focus of the patient interview. This form
helps the practitioner identify conditions that may affect dental treatment or require referral to
a physician. (From The American Dental Association.)

CHAPTER9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

FIG 9-1, cont'd

CHAPTER

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

may identify a need for medical consultation or referral
before initiating dental care. All of this information is
carefully detailed in the patient's permanent record and
is used as needed to shape subsequent treatment.
Communicable Diseases. During the medical interview, the dentist must recognize the clinical manifestations of common infectious diseases because their presence can affect patient management and may constitute
potential transmission hazards within the dental practice. The dentist is sometimes the first health professional to
identify a patient with a contagious disease. Moreover, many
communicable diseases are transmissible through the
dental setting unless appropriate IC measures are taken
(see Chapter 8).
Of particular concern is the detection and prompt
treatment of oral infections in i mmunocompromised patients. These individuals are at high risk of developing
life-threatening illnesses due to the suppression of appropriate immune responses to infectious agents. This
immunosuppression may be caused directly by diseases
of the immune cells (e.g., leukemia, lymphomas, infection with the human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]) or
indirectly by the use of immunosuppressive drugs and
therapies (e.g., drug administration to prevent rejection
of transplanted tissues and irradiation therapy for some
cancers). The oral manifestations of bacterial, fungal, and
viral infections in these immunocompromised individuals can develop into extensive, aggressive, and painful
lesions that occur in characteristic or uncharacteristic locations and too often result in lethal dissemination to vital organs. Therefore, careful examination, detection,
and aggressive treatment of oral and perioral lesions in
this population are critical steps in maintaining the
health of immunocompromised patients.
A comprehensive treatise of the numerous oral and
perioral manifestations associated with communicable
diseases is beyond the scope of this book. The reader is
referred to texts on oral medicine, oral microbiology,
and oral pathology for additional information. A list of
recommended readings is included at the end of this
chapter. The more common infectious diseases and associated orofacial lesions are reviewed in this section.
Some of the clinical symptoms associated with contagious diseases that should be familiar to the dentist are
listed in Table 9-1, and the intraoral and extraoral manifestations are shown in Plate 9-1. The dentist must be
capable of detecting and identifying these manifestations either during the medical interview or during the
clinical examination of soft tissues of the head (intraoral
and extraoral) and neck (see Examination of Orofacial
Soft Tissues).
Herpes Simplex Virus. This infectious disease is one
of the most common nonrespiratory viral diseases affecting humans. Transmitted primarily through saliva,
the herpes simplex virus (HSV) preferentially infects the
skin, mucous membranes, eyes, and nervous tissues.

The two HSV types tend to affect different regions of the
body; type 1 involves the oral and perioral tissues
("above the waist"), whereas type 2 involves the genital
and surrounding areas ("below the waist"). However,
oral infections with HSV type 2 and genital infections
with HSV type 1 are becoming more common, and their
disease manifestations are clinically indistinguishable.
In relatively healthy patients, infections are localized to
the skin and mucous membranes. However, virus dissemination within the immunosuppressed individual
or newborn may lead to serious sequelae such as
esophagitis, pneumonitis, hepatitis, meningitis, or viral
encephalitis .43
Primary infection with HSV type 1 usually occurs in
children and is typically subclinical, but may be preceded
by malaise, headache, irritability, fever, lymphadenopathy, and pharyngitis. Oral manifestations of primary
HSV infection present as primary herpetic gingivostomatitis, an intraoral condition characterized by intensely red
gingiva and small, painful vesicles (fluid-filled lesions)
on the lips, facial mucosa, palate, pharynx, tonsils, or gingiva (see Plate 9-1, A). After the lesions rupture, they appear as shallow ulcers with irregular red borders ("halo")
and may be covered by a gray pseudomembranous
covering (see Plate 9-1, B). Symptoms may last from 10 to
14 days before resolving. It is important to note that infectious virus is present during this period and can be easily
transmitted to others via contact with lesions and infected saliva.
During primary infection, the virus gains access to the
nerve endings adjacent to the point of entry. HSV then
retreats along the nerve to the sensory ganglia (trigeminal ganglion for oral lesions) where it lies dormant until
reactivated by one of several factors (e.g., stress, sunlight, trauma, fatigue, or allergy). Upon reactivation, the
virus travels down the nerve to the epithelium, where it
produces secondary herpetic lesions on the lips (herpes
labialis, commonly known as fever blisters or cold sores) (see
Plate 9-1, C) or, less frequently, within the oral cavity.
These secondary herpetic lesions, usually seen in adults,
are frequently preceded by a burning or tingling sensation at the site where a single vesicle or cluster of vesicles subsequently develops. Intraoral, herpetic lesions
occur in clusters, have well-defined borders, and are
confined to the attached tissues of the palate, gingiva,
and alveolar ridges (see Plate 9-1, B). Topical or systemic
administration of the antiviral drug acyclovir or its derivatives valacyclovir and famciclovir reduces the duration and severity of HSV-related symptoms if given before the onset of skin lesions. However, the extensive
lesions seen in immunosuppressed patients infected
with HSV require lengthy systemic therapy for complete resolution.
HSV infections also are of particular concern to those
delivering patient care. Herpetic whitlow, HSV infection
of the finger, has been documented among dental pro-

CHAPTER 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

fessionals (see Plate 9-1, D). This painful lesion arises
from contact of infected oral secretions with broken skin
of the finger. In addition, ocular infection with HSV may
occur following autoinoculation from an oral infection,
with potentially serious consequences of scarring and
blindness. The routine use of gloves and protective eyewear
during patient treatment significantly reduces the occupational exposure to HSV.
Chickenpox (Varicella) and Shingles (Zoster).

Infection with the varicella-zoster virus (VZV) presents
as chickenpox (varicella) during initial exposure and as
shingles (zoster) in reactivated (or recurrent) disease.
Chickenpox, a common and relatively mild childhood
disease, is easily transmitted by airborne droplets and
direct contact. Following an incubation period of 2 to 3
weeks, infected individuals frequently complain of malaise and fever. A rash typically appears on the trunk and
spreads centrifugally to the head and extremities (see
Plate 9-l, E). The rash is later replaced by crops of vesicles, which rupture and crust. Lesions frequently appear
on the oral mucosa as nonpainful, blisterlike ulcers that
resemble aphthous ulcers (see Plate 9-1, F).
After acute infection, the virus remains dormant indefinitely in the dorsal root ganglia of the affected sensory nerves. Reactivation in the form of shingles or
zoster may occur decades later in the immunocompetent
adult over the age of 50 or at any age in the immunosuppressed individual. Reactivation of virus replication occurs along the sensory distribution of the affected nerve
(dermatome) and is frequently accompanied by itching
and neuralgia. Skin lesions also occur characteristically
along the unilateral dermatome distribution and appear
as vesicles that erupt and ulcerate (see Plate 9-1, G). In
the relatively healthy adult, the active disease is brought
under control within a few days. However, in older persons or the severely immunocompromised, the lesions
may resolve slowly and neural pain may persist for several months. Treatment includes palliative agents to decrease itching and pain and the antiherpetic drugs acyclovir, famciclovir or valacyclovir to limit the duration
and intensity of symptoms. A newly approved varicella
vaccine is recommended for healthy children, patients
with chronic diseases or immunosuppressive conditions
such as leukemia, and susceptible health care workers.
An infected patient with chickenpox can transmit the
virus via the respiratory route for 1 to 5 days following
the appearance of the rash. Treating an infected patient
in the dental office during that period may disseminate
the infection to other susceptible patients and to dental
personnel. Routine dental care should be postponed in patients with chickenpox until all lesions have crusted.
Condyloma Acuminatum (Venereal Warts).

Condyloma acuminatum, more commonly referred to as
venereal warts, is caused by the human papillomavirus.
This transmissible and autoinoculable disease affects
the anogenital skin and mucosa. Oral lesions initially

present as soft pink nodules on the gingiva or other mucosal surface. These nodules may remain flat with welldefined margins or may coalesce to form raised, papillomatous ("cauliflower-like") clusters (see Plate 9-1, H).
Typically asymptomatic, lesions may be localized or
scattered throughout the mouth and frequently recur.
Because some lesions have premalignant potential, removal by surgical excision, cryosurgery, or laser therapy
and histologic evaluation are recommended.
Respiratory Viruses. Arguably the most frequently
transmitted diseases within the dental environment are
those caused by respiratory viruses. This group of viruses includes both viruses whose primary disease manifestations directly affect the respiratory tract (e.g., rhinoviruses, respiratory syncytial viruses, and influenza
viruses) and viruses that are transmitted via respiratory secretions but manifest themselves through other
organ systems (e.g., rubelala, rubella). Transmission occurs through inhalation of or direct contact with droplets and aerosols. Depending on the etiologic agent,
symptoms may include sneezing, cough, low-grade
fever, headache, malaise, conjunctivitis, and rash. In the
i mmunocompetent individual, these respiratory infections are usually self-limiting and have few serious sequelae. Newly developed antiviral medications such as
inhaled zamamivir for influenza virus infection reduced
the duration and severity of symptoms in clinical trials
and are awaiting approval by the Federal Drug Administration (FDA). However, in the immunocompromised
or medically compromised patient, serious morbidity
and mortality may result. The antiviral agent amantadine may provide relief in these severe situations. Annual vaccination for influenza viruses is recommended,
especially in older persons and other highly susceptible
populations. Vaccines are not currently available for the
other respiratory viruses.
Rubeola (Measles). Rubeola, also known as measles,
is a highly contagious viral childhood disease that
spreads via respiratory secretions. Following an incubation period of 10 to 12 days, virus multiplication in the
upper respiratory tract and conjunctivae causes prodromal symptoms of dry cough, sore throat, headache, lowgrade fever, and conjunctivitis. During this prodromal
stage, characteristic intraoral lesions known as Koplik
spots may appear on the facial mucosa opposite the first
and second maxillary molars. These lesions resemble
white grains of sand set within red, inflamed patches.
Following the prodromal period, a red maculopapular
rash appears on the head and face and quickly extends
to the extremities. Pharyngitis is commonly present. Because virus shedding occurs during the prodromal period and for about 2 days after the appearance of the
rash (before the disease can be recognized), measles is
spread rapidly throughout populated regions and can
quickly escalate to epidemic proportions. However, since
widespread vaccination began in 1973, the number and

CHAPTER 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

CHAPTER 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

C H A PT E R 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

geographic extent of measles outbreaks have been limited. Although this infection is usually self-limiting, secondary infection of the lesions with staphylococci or other
bacteria may result.
Rubella (German Measles). Rubella, commonly
called German measles, results from infection with a togavirus, a virus distinct from the causative agent of rubeola. Rubella is an usually mild disease characterized by
fever, transient rash, and vesicular eruption, features
that closely resemble rubeola but are of shorter duration. Like rubeola, rubella is transmitted by droplets
from the mouth, nose, and throat, and is communicable
before symptoms appear. Although rare, oral lesions appear as rose-colored lesions of the palatal mucosa and
the posterior region of the oral cavity. The disease is
usually benign and self-limiting; however, secondary
staphylococcal infections may develop, and infection
during the first trimester of pregnancy can cause serious
congenital defects in the fetus. Female dental professionals
and the spouses of male dental professionals should be protected by vaccination and by adherence to proper IC measures.
Mumps. Bilateral or unilateral enlargement of the
parotid, submandibular, and/or sublingual glands is the
hallmark of mumps, a childhood disease. The paramyxovirus, the etiologic agent of mumps, is transmitted via
respiratory droplets and saliva. Following an incubation
period of 2 to 5 weeks, symptoms include headache,
malaise, weight loss, fever, and swollen, tender salivary
glands. Infected individuals are considered infectious
approximately 2 days before swelling is noted, and remain infectious until approximately 9 days after swelling subsides. Although mumps can be an uncomfortable illness, it has few serious sequelae and an effective
vaccine is available. Because this viral infection is spread
by saliva via droplet dissemination and direct contact,
care must be taken to limit transmission in the dental
practice.
Infectious Mononucleosis. Primary infection with
the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) results in infectious mononucleosis (IM), an acute illness characterized by generalized lymphadenopathy, mild fever, and petechiae
(pin-point subsurface hemorrhages) typically at the border of the hard and soft palates. Although the virus is
present in saliva and exudates, IM is not very contagious and is transmitted mainly by direct contact with
infected saliva (hence the nickname, "kissing disease").
IM typically lasts from 1 to 4 weeks but may linger for
several months or longer. No specific treatment is available for IM and serious complications rarely develop.
Hepatitis B Virus. The hepatitis B virus (HBV) is
readily transmitted through body fluids such as blood
and saliva, and represents a significant occupational hazard for the dental professional. Fortunately, an effective vaccine is readily available for protection against HBV.
Follow-up evaluation of immunization also is important to ensure that an appropriate immune response is

generated. However, up to two thirds of acutely infected individuals report no symptoms and are unaware that they harbor the virus. Because both symptomatic and asymptomatic infected patients can transmit the
virus, universal precautions must be taken with all patients to
prevent disease transmission . 25 During the acute stage of
infection, individuals may exhibit vague symptoms of
nausea, gastrointestinal distress, muscular aches, lowgrade fever, chronic fatigue, or jaundice (yellowing of
the skin and sclera). No distinct oral changes are associated with HBV infection. Other aspects of HBV infection
are detailed in Chapter 8.
Hepatitis C Virus. Another contagious virus that
causes chronic liver disease is hepatitis C virus (HCV)
(see Chapter 8). Formerly referred to as non-A, non-B
hepatitis, HCV infection leads to hepatitic disease in 60%
to 85% of cases, is strongly associated with liver cirrhosis, portal hypertension, and hepatocellular carcinoma
and is a leading cause of non-alcohol-associated liver
transplantation in this country." Most infected individuals are unaware of their infection and diagnosis is oftentimes delayed for several years until end-stage disease
has developed . 25 HCV transmission occurs primarily
through blood. Although present in saliva and other
body fluids, no report has described viral transmission
through blood-free saliva. No vaccine is available and
i mmune globulin is not an effective postexposure prophylaxis. In clinical trials, experimental therapies using
a-interferon, ribavirin, and viral protease inhibitors
have shown modest short-term improvements in reducing viral titer, stabilizing or restoring liver function, and
slowing tissue destruction in the liver. The long-term effects of these therapies and their usefulness in postexposure prophylaxis and acute disease are not known.
Although the risk of HCV occupational transmission in
the dental setting is low, strict adherence to universal precautions is recommended to reduce exposure to blood
and blood-contaminated saliva.
Human Immunodeficiency Virus. The majority of
individuals infected with the human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) present with some type of intraoral manifestation, many of which may be detected early in the
disease course.", " Lesions associated with HIV may
arise from either newly acquired infections or from reactivation of opportunistic infections, asymptomatic infections that usually are held in check by a competent
i mmune system. However, during the course of HIV
disease, the immune response slowly deteriorates, allowing these opportunistic infections to reappear and
cause significant morbidity and mortality. Aggressive
management of HIV disease through potent antiretroviral medication use and therapies to reconstitute the immune response may resolve or reduce the severity of
oral manifestations. However, lesions may reappear
when drug-resistant viral strains arise in infected patients. HIV associated lesions arise from various sources:

CHAPTER 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

fungal infections (candidiasis), viral infections (herpetic lesions, hairy leukoplakia, warts), bacterial infections (HIVassociated periodontal diseases) and neoplastic origin
(Kaposi's sarcoma), in addition to those of generalized or
undetermined origin (lymphadenopathy, aphthouslike ulcers, or HIV-associated salivary gland disease). Clinical
manifestations not previously discussed in this section
are briefly addressed.
Oral Candidiasis. The most prevalent oral infection
in HIV-infected individuals, oral candidiasis, a fungal
infection, often presents as the initial manifestation and
frequently predicts the likelihood of other opportunistic
infections .27,5 1 Although occasionally observed in older
patients, the detection of these lesions is strongly suggestive of HIV infection in a young person without a
known cause such as xerostomia ("dry mouth") or therapy with antibiotics, corticosteroids, or other immunosuppressive drugs.
Candidiasis appears on oral mucosa as one of four
distinct forms: (1) pseudomembranous, (2) hyperplastic,
(3) atrophic or erythematous, or (4) angular cheilitis.
Pseudomembranous candidiasis, or thrush, is characterized
by white or yellow plaques that can be easily wiped off
to reveal erythematous surfaces that easily bleed (see
Plate 9-1, I). The hyperplastic form also appears as lightcolored plaques, but cannot be removed by scraping.
The atrophic form occurs as smooth, red patches, more
commonly on palatal tissues, facial mucosa, or the dorsal surface of the tongue. Angular cheilitis appears as fissures or ulcers radiating from the corners of the mouth
and are frequently associated with white plaques. Candidiasis is generally diagnosed by its clinical appearance and confirmed by staining with potassium hydroxide. If left untreated, oral candidiasis can extend
into the esophagus and develop into a potentially lifethreatening illness. In most cases, oral candidiasis can
be treated effectively with topical antifungal agents such
as nystatin, clotrimazole, or ketoconazole; however, refractory cases may require systemic antifungal chemotherapy (e.g., fluconazole).
Hairy Leukoplakia. First reported by Greenspan and
others in 1984, oral hairy leukoplakia (HL) describes an
adherent, filamentous white plaque that exhibits a characteristic corrugated or "hairy" appearance (see Plate
9-1, J). The lesion is typically observed on parakeratinized mucosa on the lateral border of the tongue, and
may occur unilaterally or bilaterally. However, HL may
extend to cover the dorsal surface of the tongue and also
can appear on facial mucosa. This lesion is caused by
the EBV, is usually asymptomatic, and has no known
premalignant potential. Removal of the lesion may be
indicated for esthetic reasons.
Kaposi's Sarcoma. HIV infected patients may present with Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), a malignancy involving the endothelial covering of blood vessel walls. This
lesion is often an initial manifestation of the severe stage

of HIV disease known as acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Over half of patients with mucocutaneous
KS exhibit oral and perioral lesions . 51 The clinical appearance of oral KS is variable, but typically presents as
blue, purple, or brown raised areas on the palate (see
Plate 9-1, K), and also may be present on the tongue,
gingiva, or other oral structures. Nearly two thirds of
patients with oral KS have associated symptoms of pain
or difficulty in swallowing.
HIV-Associated Periodontal Diseases. Unusual clinical forms of periodontal diseases have been described
in persons infected with HIV .18.51 These lesions include
linear gingival erythema (LGE), necrotizing ulcerative
gingivitis (NUG), necrotizing ulcerative periodontitis
(NUP) and necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis (NUS).
LGE (formerly called HIV-associated gingivitis, or HIVG) is characterized by a distinct linear erythema limited
to the marginal gingiva and the absence of mucosal ulceration (see Plate 9-1, L). Petechiae are frequently an associated finding. Spontaneous bleeding or bleeding
upon probing of the involved gingiva may be present
even in patients with meticulous home care. Unlike conventional gingivitis, this atypical gingivitis is not associated with plaque accumulation and poor oral hygiene,
but rather can appear in areas with little or no plaque.
Although the etiology has not been clearly defined,
studies demonstrating an association between oral candidiasis and LGE suggest that the lesion may arise from
a local fungal infection or candidal-induced altered immune response that makes the individual particularly
susceptible to subgingival bacteria.
Treatment consists
of removal of dental plaque if present and daily use of
an antimicrobial oral rinse containing 0.12% chlorhexidine. The use of antifungal medications is not indicated
because LGE does not progress to more serious forms of
periodontal disease and typically resolves with the use
of chlorhexidine alone.
Necrotizing and ulcerative forms of periodontal diseases also have been described in immunosuppressed
HIV-infected persons. NUG, NUP (formerly called HIVassociated periodontitis) and NUS are periodontal lesions
considered to represent different points on a spectrum of
severity and extent of tissue destruction . 5o NUG involves
isolated areas of soft tissue ulceration and necrosis limited to interdental gingival papillae. NUP presents all the
features of NUG, but also includes rapid destruction of
the periodontal attachment and alveolar bone, deep
seated pain, and tooth mobility. NUS appears when tissue destruction and necrosis extend beyond periodontal
tissues to affect adjacent areas such as the palate. The intense pain, spontaneous bleeding, and fetid odor associated with all of these lesions often drive patients to seek
dental care. Patients may respond to an aggressive course
of debridement involving scaling and root planing, irrigation of affected tissues with a 10% povidone-iodine
solution (which also has a topical anesthetic effect),

C H A PT E R 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

systemic antibiotics effective against both aerobic and
anaerobic bacteria (e.g., metronidazole, clindamycin),
twice daily rinses with chlorhexidine, and reinforcement
of oral hygiene practices. However, recurrence is common and refractory lesions may require further treatment by a specialist.
Lymphadenopathy. Lymphadenopathy, or swollen
lymph glands, is an almost invariant feature of HIV infection. Lymphadenopathy may be present at any time
throughout the course of infection. Manual palpation of
the superficial lymph nodes of the neck will reveal the
presence of cervical lymphadenopathy during the extraoral clinical examination.
Aphthous Ulcers. Aphthouslike ulcerations may develop during the course of HIV infection. These recurrent ulcers usually appear as solitary lesions that persist
and may be associated with ulcers of the esophagus and
pharynx. Unlike HSV lesions, aphthous ulcers are confined to movable mucosa (e.g., buccal mucosa, floor of
mouth). The application of topical corticosteroids can
hasten healing in many instances; however, systemic
corticosteroid therapy may be required for lesions resistant to topical treatment.
Salivary-Gland Disease. Some HIV infected individuals complain of xerostomia, with or without enlargement of parotid and minor salivary glands, during the
early stage of infection. Although the cause of this
salivary-gland disease is unclear, the xerostomia and
glandular swelling both may be managed by conventional means and antiretroviral therapy.
Tuberculosis. Tuberculosis (TB) is a highly contagious
granulomatous disease caused by the slow-growing,
rod-shaped, acid-fast bacillus Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
This bacillus is transmitted via inhalation of respiratory
droplets and aerosols (e.g., sputum and saliva), ingestion, or direct inoculation. Initial infection usually occurs
in the lungs or intestines, depending on the route of
transmission. However, dissemination to other regions
such as the bones, meninges, kidneys, skin, lymph nodes,
and oral structures may occur. Unless aggressively
treated with multidrug chemotherapy, the unhealed
bacterial lesions (tubercles) persist indefinitely within
walled-off regions of the lungs and body tissues.
Caseation (cheeselike) necrosis results as dead cells accumulate in the center of the tubercles. These caseous lesions may eventually heal by fibrosis and calcification to
form radiodense Ghon complexes detectable upon radiographic evaluation of the lungs. However, in a small
percentage of infected individuals, the lesions do not
heal, and they release infectious particles that disseminate throughout the body to seed other organs (miliary

tuberculosis).
Accurate diagnosis of TB is a common and serious problem
because the infection may not be suspected or recognized.
Furthermore, symptoms (e.g., fatigue, cough, excessive
weight loss, low-grade fever, recurrent night sweats) re-

semble those of other infectious diseases, such as HIV
Oral lesions, which occur rarely and are usually secondary to pulmonary involvement, include tuberculosis
gingivitis, tuberculosis of the lips, and persistent exudative ulcers of the tongue. Because these oral lesions may
mimic squamous cell carcinoma, differential diagnosis
should include one of several tests for TB: the skin test
(PPD), sputum culture, and chest radiograph.
TB remains one of the most widespread and persistent human transmissible infections worldwide. Historically, the incidence of TB in developed countries has
decreased because of effective chemotherapeutic agents
and isolation procedures; however, TB remains a major
cause of disease and death in underdeveloped and developing third-world countries. Unfortunately, the recent
emergence of drug-resistant strains of Mycobacterium tu-

berculosis coupled with increasing poverty, homelessness,
crowding, and rising numbers of persons with AIDS has
led to the resurgence of TB as a significant public health

problem in this country. Older persons who were infected
in the 1920s and 1930s and continued to harbor persistent bacillus represent an important and growing source
of TB. These individuals may experience a reactivation
of their disease with deterioration of their immune response with aging.

The TB-infected patient represents a significant occupational hazard for dental personnel. Open lesions and infected sputum and saliva are highly contagious. Moreover, the outer lipid coating ("spore") of the bacillus
allows the organism to survive in dried fluids for extended periods of time and renders it resistant to many
germicidal agents. Therefore, dental personnel must ad-

here to proper IC measures, which include personal protective
barriers (e.g., eyewear, mask, and gloves) during patient
treatment and the appropriate use of tuberculocidal disinfectants and sterilants (see Chapter 8).
Gonorrhea. The bacterium Neisseria gonorrhoeae, a
gram-negative diplococci, is the etiologic agent for gonorrhea, one of the most prevalent sexually transmitted
diseases today. This organism is spread by direct contact
with infected mucosal lesions of the urogenital tract,
eyes, and oral cavity. Following an incubation period of
2 to 21 days, infected individuals may experience purulent urethral or vaginal discharge and pharyngitis. Rare
oral lesions appear as patchy edema and erythema of
the tonsillar regions and uvula, and as vesicles at the
site of primary contact. Diagnosis is made by culture of
the organism or microscopic examination of the discharge. Although this infection is effectively treated with
penicillin, the emergence of penicillin-resistant strains
of gonorrhea has heightened the awareness of gonorrhea as a serious public health threat.
Syphilis. Caused by the bacteria Treponema pallidum,
syphilis may be acquired congenitally or through direct
contact with infected mucous membranes of the oral,
genital, and anorectal regions. Syphilis is characterized

CHAPTER

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

by three stages. Primary syphilis of the oral cavity appears as a hard ulcer (chancre) of the lip, tongue, gingiva, or palate. Unless treated with an antibiotic such as
penicillin, primary syphilis may progress to secondary
syphilis. A red maculopapular rash on the body, highly
infectious erythematous patches on mucous membranes,
bone defects, and recurrences characterize the secondary form. Continued progression can lead to tertiary
syphilis with neurologic or cardiovascular involvement.
Lesions may present intraorally as gummas, granulomatous lesions on the palate or tongue, which may erode
and/or affect the central nervous system (CNS). Although individuals in the tertiary stage are not infectious, untreated individuals in the primary and secondary stages are highly contagious.
In summary, dental professionals must be aware of
the signs and symptoms of infectious diseases and their
routes of transmission for the proper evaluation, diagnosis, and management of patients. Because these contagious diseases may be spread from the infected patient to the
dental team and to other patients, meticulous attention to IC
practices is essential.
Allergies or Medications. The patient interview
should include a discussion of any allergies or medications noted on the medical history form. Sometimes patients report that they are "sensitive" or allergic to local
anesthetic. They often refer to having had a reaction after the injection of "Novocaine." These alleged reactions
are often attributable to excessive anesthetic deposited
over too short a time, or, more likely, to an intravascular
deposition. However, patients may be allergic to preservatives in topical and injectable local anesthetics. Therefore when any patient relays a history of "sensitivity" from

injected dental anesthetic, the dentist must believe the patient
until further investigation (be it verbal questions and an-

swers, or allergic testing in a sophisticated life-support
environment) disproves the patient's belief of an allergy.
These precautions are necessary because anaphylactic
shock following an allergic reaction can be immediate and life
threatening.

Medications used by the patient also can affect diagnosis and treatment. Certain medications can modify
normal salivary flow and composition, alter normal appearance of oral soft tissues, or affect the metabolism
and/or therapeutic effect of other pharmacologic agents.
For example, tricyclic antidepressants may render patients
extremely sensitive to epinephrine, antiepileptic agents
may cause gingival enlargement, and antibiotics may
reduce the efficacy of oral contraceptives.
Systemic Diseases and Cardiac Abnormalities. The
presence of systemic diseases or cardiac abnormalities
may require that treatment be altered (see Chapter 10).
Of special note are patients with certain heart disorders.
The manipulation of mucosal surfaces during dental
procedures or even the patient's home care procedures
may release bloodborne bacteria that lodge on abnor-

mal or damaged heart valves or in the filial tissues, possibly resulting in increased risk of bacterial endocarditis. Patients with cardiac conditions such as valvular defects or heart murmurs may be at an increased risk of
acquiring bacterial endocarditis following surgical and
dental procedures. Patients who have used the "fenphen" combination of appetite suppressants fenfluramine and phentermine for weight loss also are susceptible to valvular heart disease. Patients at risk for bacterial
endocarditis should be treated prophylactically with
an appropriate antibiotic before dental treatment. The
reader is referred to the latest recommendations by the
American Heart Association for information regarding
antibiotic-dosing regimens, specific cardiac conditions
for which endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended,
and the dental procedures requiring coverage." As a
screening test for underlying diseases such as hypertension, the patient's pulse and blood pressure should be
taken and recorded. This information provides a baseline for monitoring changes in the patient's health over
time and for managing medical emergencies. High blood
pressure, a sign of hypertension, is defined as having
systolic blood pressure of at least 140 mm Hg or diastolic
blood pressure of at least 90 mm Hg. Two or more blood
pressure readings should be taken during the initial patient visit to determine the average blood pressure for
that patient. A blood pressure reading is recommended
at each subsequent visit before initiating an invasive dental procedure, including restorative treatment and prophylaxis. If any patient presents with a systolic blood
pressure exceeding 180 mm Hg and/or diastolic blood
pressure exceeding 110 mm Hg, routine dental treatment
should be deferred until acceptable levels are achieved, and the
patient should be referred for medical evaluation.
Physiologic Changes Associated With Aging. With
the lengthening life span and increased retention of teeth
by older patients, dentists are treating more geriatric patients in their practices. Americans 65 years of age or
older represented 13 percent of the total population in the
United States in 1995. 1 By 2013, this number is expected to
increase to 30 percent, largely because of the "graying" of
the baby boom generation .l In general, patients (especially women) are living longer, are more highly educated, enjoy greater financial independence, and are expected to spend a greater proportion of their income on
health care compared to their younger counterparts .l
It is important to thoroughly understand the medical and dental background of older patients. The geriatric population can experience significant age-related
changes in behavior and diet, as well as in oral and systemic health. Older persons generally have more medical, physical, and mental problems than their younger
counterparts. The majority of older persons have at least
one chronic disease (e.g., heart disease, renal dysfunction), and many suffer from two or more serious, oftenti mes interrelated diseases . 8 Many older persons have

CHAPTER

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

some impairment that limits their ability to perform
daily activities such as tooth brushing due to mental
disorders (e.g., depression, Alzheimer's disease) and
physical ailments (e.g., arthritis).
Prescription medication use is rampant among the
older adult population, with nearly 50% of persons
aged 75 years or older taking at least two medications
each day. Several medications and illnesses can alter
oral physiology, oral hygiene, and dental health, necessitating changes in treatment. For example, xerostomia,
or reduced salivary flow, is a significant potential side
effect of over 200 prescription medications, including
anticholinergic, adrenergic-blocking, antipsychotic, antihistamine, diuretic, and antihypertensive medications .Xerostomic medications may result in increased caries
incidence, mucosal alterations, and plaque retention. The
use of salivary stimulants such as sugar-free candy drops,
artificial saliva, or pilocarpine in more serious cases,
along with lowering drug dosage, may lessen or relieve
this symptom. Additional considerations include the limited use of vasoconstrictors in patients with advanced
cardiovascular disease, reduced dosages of diazepam to
prevent oversedation due to poor renal/hepatic clearance with aging, and interactions between drugs prescribed for dental purposes and the patient's other medications (e.g., epinephrine, antidepressants).
Several normal physiologic changes may occur in
older patients' and should not be mistaken for pathologic conditions. For example, the skin and blood vessels lose their elasticity because of degeneration of the
elastic connective tissue and delayed healing following
surgical procedures may result. Bones become more
brittle and easily broken with advancing age. Sensory
impairment may lead to hearing loss, visual changes,
and alterations in taste and smell. Dental and mucosal
changes also may be associated with the aging process.
A tooth can change shape because of many years of attrition, abrasion, and wear of proximal surfaces. Variations in pulpal anatomy, physiology, and color changes
due to extrinsic staining can occur with age and may
lead to increased brittleness of the teeth. A continuous
thickening of the cementum is frequently noted and is
most pronounced in the apical regions. The gingivae
can become edematous and friable, with a loss of stippling, and recede. Salivary flow rate may decrease with
advanced age as a result of deposition of fatty and fibrous tissues within salivary glands.-' The diminished
salivary flow results in loss of elasticity of the oral mucosa and increased caries rate. An understanding that
these physiologic or metabolic changes are not pathologic is essential for proper operative treatment planning for the geriatric patient.
Of primary importance in planning dental therapy is
the biologic or physiologic age of the older patient, not
the chronologic age. Factors such as genetic predisposition, physical or mental capabilities, and the presence of

chronic disease may make an individual's biologic age
older or younger than his or her chronologic age. Consideration of these factors in the treatment plan is crucial for the long-term success of any dental treatment of
the older patient.
SOCIOLOGIC AND PSYCHOLOGIC REVIEW

During initial visits the clinician should ascertain the
patient's attitudes, priorities, expectations, and motivations toward dental care. Attitudinal information combined with assessment of the patient's dental appreciation, educability, habits, parental history, occupation,
and financial situation can indicate the patient's commitment to dental care. This commitment contributes to
the overall success of dental treatment. As with every
facet of patient assessment and examination, it is essential to maintain and update records of discussions and
clinical findings.
During this portion of the pretreatment assessment,
the dentist must begin to explore patient's preferences
for dental care. The results of this exploration will affect
the dentist's treatment recommendations.
DENTAL HISTORY

The dental history consists of reviewing previous dental experiences and current dental problems. Review of
the dental history reveals information about past dental problems and treatment. Frequency of dental care
and perceptions of that care may be indications of the
patient's future behavior. Obviously, if a patient has difficulty tolerating certain types of procedures or has encountered problems with previous dental care, an alteration of the treatment or environment may help
avoid future complications. Also, this discussion may
lead to identification of other problems such as areas of
food impaction, inability to floss, areas of pain, and broken restorations and/or tooth structure. It is critical to
understand past experiences to provide optimal care in
the future.
Finally, it is important to know the date and type of
available radiographs to ascertain the need for additional radiographs and minimize the patient's exposure
to unnecessary ionizing radiation. The FDA guidelines
help direct the type and frequency of radiographs
needed according to patient condition and risk factors
(Table 9-2).
RISK ASSESSMENT

Few diseases known to man are caused by a single factor. Instead most diseases have been shown to be associated with numerous behavioral/ sociodemographic,
physical/ environmental, microbiologic, or host factors.
In addition, every patient possesses a different set of risk
factors and as such presents a challenge to determine the
likelihood that disease is present or will occur in the future. For example, patients who possess several of the

CHAPTER

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

Guidelines for Prescribing Dental Radiographs for Dentate Adults

'See Table 9-3 for caries risk factors.

NON-ORAL
Age
Socioeconomic status
Medical condition
Medications
Fluoride history
Dietary habits
Genetic predisposition
General health

Less than 18 or more than 65 years old
Lower status
Reduced salivation
Reduced salivation
Lack of fluoride during tooth development
High intake of refined carbohydrates; tobacco and alcohol use
Family history of disease
Debilitation and decreased ability to give self-care

ORAL
Tooth anatomy and composition

Development fissures and low fluoride content

Oral flora/plaque
Previous infections and restorations
Restorations

High levels of mutans streptococci (see Chapter 3)
History of extensive restoration

Oral hygiene (e.g., skills, knowledge, motivation)

Defective restorations
Poor oral hygiene

risk factors shown in Table 9-3 should be considered at
high risk for dental caries. This assessment will then be
used to guide treatment. A patient at high risk for dental caries should receive aggressive intervention to remove or alter as many risk factors as possible. Alternatively, regular monitoring and reassessment of the
condition may be appropriate for a patient at low risk
for dental caries.
Risk assessment is a relatively young science in the
health care professions. Unfortunately no valid standardized means of determining caries risk are available. Historically dentists have relied on their knowledge of the
disease process in combination with their experiences
and intuition to estimate the risk levels for their patients. To properly prescribe and determine appropriate
preventive and therapeutic strategies, the dentist must

consider the patient's overall risk status in the context of
the current level of understanding of both disease progression and management options. Though such understanding is not yet perfected, certain conditions place
patients at a higher risk for dental disease. Knowing
this, dentists should try to identify and assess risk factors for dental disease during the initial oral examination and subsequent patient appointments.

EXAMINATION AND DIAGNOSIS
This section describes the examination and diagnosis of
problems with orofacial soft tissues, teeth, restorations,
periodontium, and occlusion. Special considerations for
evaluating the patient presenting with pain also are reviewed. In practice, each tooth is evaluated individually by using a combination of clinical and radiographic

CHAPTER 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

examinations and appropriate adjunctive tests. However, for the purpose of presentation, the clinical examination, radiographic survey, and use of adjunctive diagnostic aids are discussed separately.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Clinical examination is the "hands-on" process of observing both normal and abnormal conditions. Diagnosis is
a determination and judgment of variations from normal. During the clinical examination the dentist must be
keenly sensitive to subtle signs, symptoms, and variations from normal to detect pathologic conditions and
etiologic factors. Meticulous attention to detail generates
a base of information for diagnosing the patient's general physical health and specific dental problems.
As alluded to in the previous section on IC, universal IC
measures should be adhered to throughout the examination procedure. Certainly before any "hands-on" examination, standard precautions must be taken to avoid the
transmission of disease. These precautions include the
sterilization/ disinfection of all instruments, supplies,
and operatory surfaces and the use of barrier techniques
such as gloves, masks, protective eyewear, and gowns,
consistent with prevailing standards (see Chapter 8).
While following accepted barrier techniques, the initial step in the clinical examination includes an observation of the patient's general physical health and oral
condition to determine the presence of potentially
harmful communicable diseases (see Plate 9-1 and Table
9-1). However, as emphasized in Chapter 8, some individual disease carriers such as those infected with HIV
or HBV may not be identified during medical review
and clinical examination. This underscores the necessity
for routine and universal IC for all dental patients.
An additional preliminary consideration is a cursory
examination of the general tooth alignment and occlusal
relationship because this information is helpful in the
subsequent detailed examination.
Charting and Records. The oral health record should
include the following categories of information: identification data, which includes all of the patient personal
information such as telephone number, whom to contact in case of emergency, and other relevant data; medical history, which includes the medical history form
and the dentist's interpretation and discussion of that
information; dental history; clinical examination; diagnosis; treatment planning; documentation of informed
consent; progress notes; and completion notes.
Although various formats are available for recording
a patient's dental condition, an acceptable charting system should conform to certain standards.' The chart
should be: (1) uncomplicated (easily understood by the
dentist and staff and be an effective and accurate means
of recording dental conditions); (2) comprehensive (noting all dental conditions, both normal and abnormal,
and a detailed representation of location, nature, and

size of all restorations); (3) accessible (part of the permanent patient record and easily accessible for referencing
during treatment or recall appointments); and (4) current
(allowing for continual updating as treatment is rendered and as dental or medical conditions change). If
these guidelines are followed, the findings of a thorough and systematic examination can be maintained for
each patient.
Normal and abnormal clinical and radiographic findings are noted on a detailed chart as a permanent part of
the patient's record. For example, Fig. 9-2 displays the
clinical and radiographic findings as recorded in an
electronic patient record. The growing use of computers
in the dental office is providing a range of new and comprehensive technologies. Among these is the electronic
patient record. Although issues related to patient confidentiality are a continuing concern, it is expected that
the majority of practices in the United States will soon
employ electronic patient records instead of the traditional paper form. Early versions of the electronic records have developed the means by which digital radiography and intraoral photographs can be incorporated
into the chart as well. A growing number of practitioners are using intraoral photographs to both supplement
routine dental charting and provide an educational tool
for patients.
The exact location and condition of all teeth, restorations, defects and caries, and soft and hard tissues are
necessary for many reasons, including:

Proper care-Thorough charting of existing conditions
provides basic information for an accurate, comprehensive treatment plan.
Third-party communication-Accurate records of the
patient's conditions are useful in communicating
with third-party payment agencies.
Practice audits and quality assessment-Dental charts
and records are the foundation of many quality assurance programs because the content, completeness,
and accuracy of records are used as measures of the
care provided.
Legal proceedings-The dental record is considered legal, admissible evidence in arbitration of contended
negligence or malpractice.
Forensic uses-In many instances, the dental record is
the only means of identifying a deceased person.

Tooth Denotation System. To expedite the designation of teeth during examination and charting, a denotation system is used. Several denotation systems are in
use, but the one used in this text is the universal system.
In this system, the teeth are numbered from 1 to 32 starting with the maxillary right third molar and continuing
around the arch to the left third molar, then continuing
with the mandibular left third molar as No. 17 and ending with the right third molar as No. 32.

CHAPTER 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

Upper
Facial

Upper
Lingual

32

31

30

29/T

28/S 27/R 26/Q 25/P

24/0

23/N 22/M 21/1- 20/K

19

18

17

Lower
Lingual

Lower
Facial

A

FIG .9-2 A, An appropriate restorative charting system designates location, type, and extent of existing restorations and presence
of disease and defects, all of which become part of the permanent patient record. The results of the periodontal examination are
also included in the record.
Continued

C H A PT E R

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

B

TREATMENT PLAN

C

Group

Planned

Code

Tooth

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01

0150
0210
4341
4341
4249
7286
1110
1204
3330

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01

2950
2330
2160
2330
2330
2330
2330
2330
2330

30
27
28
6
7
8
10
11
22

3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01
02/09/01

2790
2643
2630
2630
2620
2630
2160
2790
2750

2
3
4
5
12
13
14
15
30

Surface

LR
UR
LR

D
MOD
D
M
D
D
M
D

MOL
MOD
MOD
DO
MOD
MOL

Description

Fees

Accepted

Comprehensive Oral Evaluation
Full Series
Perio Root Planing per Quad
Perio Root Planning per Quad
Crown Lengthening
Biopsy of Oral Tissue
Cleaning Adult
Topical Application of Fluoride
Root Canal (3 canals)

63.00
75.00
168.00
168.00
630.00
133.00
43.00
19.00
675.00

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Crown Build-up
Tooth Colored Resin
Amalgam
Tooth Colored Resin
Tooth Colored Resin
Tooth Colored Resin
Tooth Colored Resin
Tooth Colored Resin
Tooth Colored Resin

139.00
75.00
109.00
75.00
75.00
75.00
75.00
75.00
75.00

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Cast Crown High Noble Metal
Porcelain Onlay 3 Surfaces
Porcelain Inlay 3 Surfaces
Porcelain Inlay 3 Surfaces
Porcelain Inlay 2 Surfaces
Porcelain Inlay 3 Surfaces
Amalgam
Cast Crown High Noble Metal
Crown Porcelain Fused to Metal

664.00
580.00
520.00
520.00
433.00
520.00
109.00
664.00
721.00

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

TOTALS:

7,478.00

f I G 9-2, cont'd
B, Radiographic findings obtained from this full-mouth series are correlated
with the findings of the clinical examination and noted in the patient's record. Most electronic
patient records provide a system for coding various clinical conditions. C, The results of the
medical history, interview, and clinical examination, along with an assessment of the patient's
treatment preferences, are used to generate a properly sequenced treatment plan.

C H A PT E R

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

Cell A = true positives
Cell B = false positives
Cell C = false negatives
Cell D = true negatives
Sensitivity = A/A + C
Specificity = D/B + D
Positive predictive value = A/A + B
Prevalence = A/A + B + C + D
FIG 9-3 An accurate clinical examination requires a clean, dry,
well-illuminated mouth. Cotton rolls are placed in the vestibul ar space and under the tongue to maintain dryness and enhance visibility.

I I G . 9-4 Contingency table for interpretation of diagnostic tests.

Preparation for Clinical Examination. A chairside
assistant familiar with the terminology, denotation system, and charting procedure can survey and record the
teeth and existing restorations to save chair time for the
dentist. Subsequently, the dentist will perform the examination, confirm the charting, make a diagnosis, and develop the treatment plan. The clinical examination is performed systematically in a clean, dry, well-illuminated
mouth. Proper instruments including a mirror, explorer,
and periodontal probe are required. A routine for charting should be established such as starting in the upper
right quadrant with the most posterior tooth and progressing around the maxillary and mandibular arches.
An accurate examination can occur only when the teeth
are clean and dry. This may require initial scaling, flossing, and a toothbrushing prophylaxis before final clinical examination of the teeth. A cotton roll in the vestibular space and another under the tongue will maintain
dryness and improve vision (Fig. 9-3). Dental floss is useful in determining overhanging restorations, improper
contours, and open contacts.
I nterpretation and Use of Diagnostic Tests. The diagnostic effort of health professionals has been enhanced by the use of principles adopted from the discipline of clinical epidemiology. This analytic approach is a
means of improving the interpretation of diagnostic
tests. It relies on a "2 x 2" contingency table (Fig. 9-4).
These tables are created from data derived from clinical
studies. Such studies compare the results of a diagnostic test with those obtained from a "gold standard"
(knowledge of the actual condition) to determine how
well the test diagnoses the "true" condition. The results

of the diagnostic tests, positive or negative, are shown
across the rows of the table, and the results of a gold
standard or the "truth" are displayed in the columns.
Thus, cell A of the table contains those cases that the test
identifies as being positive (or diseased) and confirmed
by the gold standard. These cases are termed true positives. Cell B contains all cases for which there is a positive
finding from the diagnostic test but a negative finding
with the gold standard. This cell denotes false positives.
Cell C includes those cases identified by the diagnostic
test as not being diseased but found by the gold standard to be diseased. Findings in this cell are termed false
negatives. The final cell, cell D, includes true negatives. In
cell D the diagnostic test accurately identifies the nondiseased cases that are truly negative as confirmed by the
gold standard. Thus, an ideal diagnostic test would result in most cases being assigned to cells A or D with few
or no false positives (cell B) and false negatives (cell C).
Once the basics of this table are understood, several
additional features can be put to good use by the diagnostician. The first concept is test sensitivity. The sensitivity of a test is calculated as the number of true positives (A) divided by the number of total positive cases
(A + C). This term indicates the proportion of those
with disease in a population that are identified positively by the test. In contrast, test specificity is the proportion of those without disease properly classified by
the diagnostic test and is the ratio of true negatives (D)
to all negatives (B + D). Therefore, sensitivity and specificity relate to the proportion of cases in a population,
diseased or not, that are predicted accurately by the diagnostic test. In contrast, the positive predictive value of a

CHAPTER

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

test is calculated by dividing the true positives (A) by all
cases tested as positive by the diagnostic test (A + B).
The positive predictive value denotes the proportion of
cases that test positive and are in fact diseased.
Using these concepts, a clinician knows that if a diagnostic test has a high positive predictive value, there is
a greater likelihood that a patient with a positive test
does have the disease. Thus, if there is a positive result
using a test with a high positive predictive value, the
clinician has greater assurance that the diagnosed condition does actually exist. A test with low sensitivity indicates that there is a high probability that many of the
cases with negative results will possess the disease and
go undiagnosed (C). Finally, tests with high specificity
suggest that patients without the disease are highly
likely to test negative.
These concepts are widely used in medical practice.
Although many of the necessary studies have not been
conducted to develop these probabilities for dental conditions, interest in the use of clinical epidemiology in
the dental profession has been growing. In the future,
more studies will be conducted to provide this information for clinicians, and one should be prepared to take
advantage of their use.
EXAMINATION OF OROFACIAL SOFT TISSUES
The reader is again referred to Plate 9-1 for a review of
oral manifestations of contagious diseases and to Table
9-1 for clinical symptoms.

As with the other aspects of the clinical examination,
soft tissue evaluation requires a systematic approach.
Begin by examining the submandibular glands and cervical nodes for abnormalities in size, texture, mobility,
and sensitivity to palpation. Then, palpate the masticatory muscles for pain or tenderness. Next, start in one
area of the mouth and follow a routine pattern of visual
examination and palpation of the cheeks, vestibules, mucosa, lips, lingual and facial alveolar mucosa, palate, tonsillar areas, tongue, and floor of the mouth. A thorough
evaluation of all these structures is necessary before operative care is initiated. It is ill advised to plan restorative
procedures for a patient while a life-threatening disease
process goes undiagnosed because a thorough examination was not conducted.
EXAMINATION OF TEETH AND RESTORATIONS
Clinical Examination for Caries. Dental caries is diagnosed by one or all of the following: (1) visual changes
in tooth surface texture or color, (2) tactile sensation
when an explorer is used judiciously, (3) radiographs,
and (4) transillumination. 31 Several technologies have
emerged that show promising results for the clinical diagnosis of caries. These include electrical conductance 5
and laser fluorescence . 21 Chapter 3 has a further discussion of available tests for caries detection. The examination is aided by knowledge of the likelihood of overall
caries risk (see Table 9-3), and patterns of susceptibility.
For example, the patient's dental history, oral hygiene,

B

D
FIG 9-5

Caries can be diagnosed radiographically as translucencies in the enamel or dentin.
A and B, Proximal caries tends to occur bilaterally (a) and on adjacent surfaces (b). C, Occlusal
caries (c). D, Recurrent caries gingival to an existing restoration (d). This same recurrent caries
(d) is also shown in B.

CHAPTER

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

diet, and age may suggest a certain pattern of caries activity. Caries also tends to occur bilaterally and on adjacent proximal surfaces (Fig. 9-5, A and B). If caries is
found on the occlusal surface and a proximal surface in
one tooth on one side of the arch, then the chances are increased that it will occur in the same locations on the opposite side. If caries is found on the proximal surface of
one tooth, then the adjacent tooth's proximal surface also
is suspect. In the clinical examination for caries, every accessible surface of each tooth must be inspected for localized changes in color, texture, and translucency.
Caries is most prevalent in the faulty pits and fissures of
the occlusal surfaces where the developmental lobes of
the posterior teeth failed to coalesce, partially or completely (Fig. 9-6, B). It is important to remember the distinction between primary occlusal grooves/fossae and
occlusal fissures/pits. Primary occlusal grooves/fossae are
smooth "valley/saucer" landmarks indicating the region
of complete coalescence of developmental lobes. Normally, such grooves/fossae are not susceptible to caries because they are not niches for plaque (and bacteria), and
furthermore are frequently cleansed by the rubbing action of food during mastication. Conversely, occlusal fis-

sure and pits are deep, tight, crevices/holes in enamel
where the lobes failed to coalesce, partially or completely
(see Fig. 2-12). Fissures and pits are detected visually.
Historically, sharp explorers have been used to diagnose fissure caries. However, numerous studies have
found that use of an explorer for this purpose did not increase diagnostic validity compared to visual inspection
alone.","," Moreover, use of the dental explorer for this
purpose was found to fracture enamel and serve as a
source for transferring pathogenetic bacteria among
various teeth. Use of an explorer in diagnosing fissure caries is strongly discouraged.
An occlusal surface is examined visually and radiographically.' ," The visual examination is conducted in a
dry, well-illuminated field. Through direct vision and
reflecting light through the occlusal surface of the tooth,
the occlusal surface is diagnosed as diseased if there is
chalkiness or apparent softening/ cavitation of tooth
structure forming the fissure/pit or brown gray discoloration radiating peripherally from the fissure/pit.
Radiographic diagnosis should be made from a bitewing radiograph when radiolucency is apparent beneath the occlusal enamel surface emanating from the

FIG . 9-6 Caries can be diagnosed clinically by careful inspection. A, Carious pit on cusp tip (a).
B, Loss of translucency and change in color of occlusal enamel (b) due to a carious fissure.
C, White chalky appearance or shadow under marginal ridge (c). D, I ncipient smooth-surface
carious lesion, or a white spot (ws), has intact surface. E, Smooth-surface caries can appear
white or dark, depending on the degree of extrinsic staining (d). F, Root-surface caries (e).

C H A PT E R 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

dental enamel junction. In contrast, a nondiseased occlusal surface will have either grooves or fossae that
have shallow tight fissures, which exhibit superficial
staining with no radiographic evidence of caries. The
superficial staining is extrinsic and occurs over several
years of oral exposure in a person with low caries risk.
The radiographic detection of occlusal carious lesions in
otherwise clinically sound teeth has been reported . 34
Thus careful inspection of high quality bitewing radiographs is critically important.
Precarious or carious pits are occasionally present on
cusp tips (see Figs. 9-6, A, and 17-110). Typically these are
the result of developmental enamel defects. Carious pits
and fissures also occur on the occlusal two thirds of the facial or lingual surface of the posterior teeth and on the lingual
surface of maxillary incisors (see Caries Diagnosis in Chapter 3 for the criteria for the diagnosis of caries in pits and
fissures). Occlusal enamel can be evaluated for loss of
translucency and change in color, which are characteristic of caries (see Fig. 9-6, B). This change in color can
be dark gray and should not be confused with the noncarious fissures/pits that often become merely stained
over time.

through the tooth. In addition to transillumination, tactile exploration of the anterior teeth is appropriate to detect cavitation because the proximal surfaces generally
are more visible and accessible than in the posterior regions. Small incipient lesions may be detectable only on
the radiograph.
Another form of smooth-surface caries often occurs on
the facial and lingual surfaces of the teeth, particularly in
gingival areas that are less accessible for cleaning. The
earliest clinical evidence of incipient caries on these surfaces is a white spot that is visually different from the adjacent translucent enamel and will partially or totally
disappear from vision by wetting. Drying again will
cause it to reappear (Fig. 9-6, D). This disappearingreappearing phenomenon distinguishes the smoothsurface incipient carious lesion from the white spot resulting from nonhereditary enamel hypocalcification
(see Clinical Examination for Additional Defects). Both
types of white spots are undetectable tactilely because
the surface is intact, smooth, and hard. For the carious
white spot, preventive treatment discussed in Chapter 3
should be instituted to promote remineralization of the
lesion.

Proximal surface caries, one form of smooth-surface caries,
is usually diagnosed radiographically (see Fig. 9-5, A).
However, it also may be detected by careful visual examination either following tooth separation or through
fiber-optic transillumination (FOTI). 31 When caries
have invaded the proximal surface enamel and have
demineralized the dentin, a white chalky appearance or
a shadow under the marginal ridge may become evident (see Fig. 9-6, C). Careful probing with an explorer
on the proximal surface may detect cavitation, which is
defined as a break in the surface contour of enamel. The
use of all examination methods is helpful in arriving at
a final diagnosis.
Brown spots on intact, hard proximal surface enamel
adjacent to and usually gingival to the contact area are
often seen in older patients whose caries activity is low
(see Fig. 9-15, C). These discolored areas are a result of
extrinsic staining during earlier caries demineralizing
episodes, each followed by a remineralization episode.
Such a spot is no longer carious and is, in fact, usually
more resistant to caries as a result of fluorhydroxyapatite formation. Restorative treatment is not indicated. These
arrested lesions sometimes challenge the diagnosis because of faint radiographic evidence of the remineralized lesion.

The presence of several facial (or lingual) smoothsurface carious lesions within a patient's dentition suggests a high caries rate. In a caries-susceptible patient,
the gingival third of the facial surfaces of maxillary posterior teeth and the gingival third of the facial and lingual surfaces of the mandibular posterior teeth should
be evaluated carefully because these teeth are at a
greater risk for caries. Advanced smooth-surface caries
will exhibit discoloration and demineralization and will
feel soft to penetration by the explorer. The discoloration can range from white to dark brown, with
rapidly progressing caries usually being light in color
(Fig. 9-6, E). With slowly progressing caries in a patient
with low caries activity, darkening occurs over time because of extrinsic staining, and remineralization of decalcified tooth structure occasionally may harden the lesion. Such an arrested lesion may at times be rough,
although cleanable (see Fig. 9-20), and a restoration is not
indicated except for esthetics. The dentin in an arrested
remineralized lesion is termed eburnated or sclerotic.
In patients with attachment loss, extra care must be
taken to inspect for root-surface caries, carious lesions
that occur on the cemental surfaces of teeth. A combination of cemental exposure, dietary changes, systemic
diseases, and medications that affect the amount and
character of saliva can predispose a patient, especially
an older individual, to root-surface caries. It is not unusual to find caries at the cementoenamel junction (CEJ)
or more apically on the cementum in older patients or in
patients who have undergone periodontal surgery (Fig.
9-6, F). Early in its development, root caries appears as
a well-defined discolored area adjacent to the gingival
margin, typically near the CEJ. Root caries is found to

Proximal-surface caries in anterior teeth may be identified
by radiographic examination, visual inspection (transillumination optional), and/or probing with an explorer. Transillumination is accomplished by placing the
mirror or light source on the lingual side of the anterior
teeth and directing light through the teeth. Proximal
surface caries, if other than incipient, appears as a dark
area along the marginal ridge when light is directed

C H A PT E R

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

be softer than the adjacent tissue and typically lesions
spread laterally around the CEJ. Although no clinical
criteria are universally accepted for the diagnosis of root
caries, there is general agreement that softened cemental/dental tooth structure compared to the surrounding
surface is characteristic. Active root caries is detected
by the presence of softening and cavitation." ," Although
root-surface caries may be detected on radiographic examination, a careful, thorough clinical examination is
critical. One of the more difficult diagnostic challenges
is a patient who has attachment loss with no gingival
recession, thereby limiting accessibility for clinical inspection. These rapidly progressing lesions are best diagnosed using vertical bitewings. However, differentiation
of a carious lesion from cervical burnout radiolucency is
essential .48
Regardless of the location or type of carious lesions, a
careful, thorough clinical examination is critical in the
diagnosis of caries and for confirmation of radiographic
evidence of the disease.
Clinical Examination of Amalgam Restorations.

Evaluation of all restorations must be done systematically in a clean, dry, well-lighted field. Clinical evaluation of amalgam restorations requires visual observation,
application of tactile sense with the explorer, use of dental floss, interpretation of radiographs, and knowledge
of the probabilities that a given condition is sound or at
risk for further breakdown.
At least 10 distinct conditions may be encountered
when amalgam restorations are evaluated: (1) amalgam
"blues," (2) proximal overhangs, (3) marginal ditching,
(4) voids, (5) fracture lines, (6) lines indicating the interface between abutted restorations, (7) improper anatomic
contours, (8) marginal ridge incompatibility, (9) improper
proximal contacts, (10) recurrent caries, and (11) improper occlusal contacts.
Discolored areas or amalgam blues are often seen
through the enamel in teeth that have amalgam restorations (Fig. 9-7). This bluish hue results either from the

FIG 9-7

Discoloration (a) by amalgam is a bluish hue (amalgam blues) seen through a thin shell of enamel of a tooth. In
the absence of any other problems this condition does not indicate replacement.

leaching of corrosion products of amalgam into the
dentinal tubules or from the color of underlying amalgam as seen through translucent enamel. The latter occurs when the enamel has no dentin support, such as in
undermined cusps, marginal ridges, and regions adjacent to proximal margins. When other aspects of the
restoration are sound, amalgam blues are not indicative
of caries, do not warrant classifying the restoration as
defective, and require no further treatment. However,
replacement of the restoration may be considered for
elective improvement of esthetics or for areas under
heavy functional stress that may require a cusp capping
restoration to prevent possible tooth fracture.
Proximal overhangs are diagnosed visually, tactilely,
and radiographically (Fig. 9-8). The amalgam-tooth junction is evaluated by moving the explorer back and forth
across it. If the explorer stops at the junction and then
moves outwardly onto the amalgam, an overhang is
present. Overhangs also can be confirmed by the catching or tearing of dental floss. Such an overhang can be
a plaque trap, provide an obstacle to good oral hygiene,
and result in inflammation of the adjacent soft tissue. If
causing problems, an overhang should be corrected,
and this often indicates replacement of the defective
restoration.
Marginal gap or ditching is the deterioration of the
amalgam-tooth interface as a result of wear, fracture, or
i mproper tooth preparation (Fig. 9-9, A). It can be diagnosed visually or by the explorer dropping into an
opening as it crosses the margin. Shallow ditching less
than 0.5 mm deep usually is not a reason for restoration
replacement37 because such a restoration usually looks
worse than it really is. The eventual self-sealing property
of amalgam allows the restoration to continue serving
adequately if it can be satisfactorily cleaned and maintained. However, if the ditch is too deep to be cleaned or
j eopardizes the integrity of the remaining restoration or
tooth structure, the restoration should be replaced . 36 In
addition, secondary caries is frequently found around

FIG 9-8

Proximal overhang (a) can be diagnosed radiographically.

CHAPTER 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

B

D
FIG . 9-9 Restorations can be diagnosed clinically as being defective by observing the following:
A, Significant marginal ditching (a). B, Improper contour (b). C, Recurrent caries. D, Esthetically
displeasing dark staining (d).

marginal gaps near the gingival wall and thus warrants
replacement . 46
Voids other than ditching also occur at the margins of
amalgam restorations. If the void is at least 0.3 mm
deep and is located in the gingival third of the tooth
crown, then the restoration is judged as defective and
should be repaired or replaced. Accessible small voids
in other marginal areas where the enamel is thicker
may be corrected by recontouring or repairing with a
small restoration.
A careful clinical examination will detect any fracture
line across the occlusal portion of an amalgam restoration. A line that occurs in the isthmus region generally indicates fractured amalgam and thus a defective
restoration that needs replacing (Fig. 9-10, A). However, care must be taken to evaluate correctly any such
line, especially if it is in the midocclusal area because
this may be an interface line, a manifestation of two
abutted restorations, each accomplished at a separate
appointment (see Fig. 9-10, B). If other aspects of the
abutted restorations are satisfactory, replacement is not
necessary.
Amalgam restorations should duplicate the normal
anatomic contours of the teeth. Restorations that impinge
on the soft tissue, have inadequate embrasure form or
proximal contact, or prevent the use of dental floss
should be classified as defective, indicating recontouring or replacement (see Fig. 9-9, B).
The marginal ridge portion of the amalgam restoration should be compatible with the adjacent marginal ridge.
Both ridges should be at approximately the same level
and display correct occlusal embrasure form for passage
of food to the facial and lingual surfaces and for proper
proximal contact area. If the marginal ridges are not

compatible and are associated with poor tissue health,
food impaction, or the inability of the patient to floss,
the restoration is defective and should be recontoured
or replaced.
The proximal contact area of an amalgam restoration
should touch (a "closed" contact) the adjacent tooth at
the proper contact level and with correct embrasure
form. If the proximal contact of any restoration is suspected to be inadequate, it should be evaluated with
dental floss and/or visually by trial angulations of a
mouth mirror (held lingually when viewing from the facial aspect) to reflect light and actually see if there is a
space at the contact ("open" contact). For this viewing,
the contact must be free of saliva. If the contact is
"open" and is associated with poor interproximal tissue
health and/or food impaction, the restoration should be
classified as defective and replaced. An "open" contact
typically is annoying and even distressing to the patient; thus correcting the problem usually is a very appreciated service.
Recurrent caries at the marginal area of the restoration
is detected visually, tactilely, or radiographically and is
an indication for repair or replacement (see Figs. 9-5, D,
and 9-9, C).
Inadequate occlusal contacts on an amalgam restoration may cause improper, deleterious occlusal functioning and/or undesirable tooth movement. Such a condition warrants correction or replacement.
Clinical Examination of Cast Restorations. Cast
restorations should be evaluated clinically in the same
manner as amalgam restorations. If any aspect of the
restoration is not satisfactory or is causing tissue harm,
it should be classified as defective and considered for recontouring, repair, or replacement.

CHAPTER

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

FIG . 9-10

Lines across the occlusal surface of an amalgam restoration may be: A, a fracture line
(a) that indicates replacement, or B, an interface line (b) that indicates two restorations placed
at separate appointments, which by itself is not sufficient indication for replacement.

Clinical Examination of Composite and Other
Tooth-Colored Restorations. Tooth-colored restora-

tions should be evaluated clinically in the same manner
as amalgam and cast restorations. If there is an improper
contour or proximal contact, an overhanging proximal
margin, recurrent caries, or other condition that impairs
cleaning, the restoration is considered defective. Corrective procedures include recontouring, polishing, repairing, or replacing.
One of the main concerns with anterior teeth is esthetics. If a tooth-colored restoration has dark marginal
staining or is discolored to the extent that it is esthetically displeasing and the patient is unhappy with the
appearance, the restoration should be judged defective
(see Fig. 9-9, D). Marginal staining that is judged noncarious may be corrected by a small repair restoration
along the margin. Occasionally the staining is superficial and can be removed by resurfacing.
Clinical Examination for Additional Defects. A
thorough clinical examination occasionally discloses localized intact, hard white areas on the facial (Fig. 9-11)
or lingual surfaces, or on cusp tips of the teeth. Generally these are nonhereditary hypocalcified areas of enamel
that may have resulted from factors such as childhood
fever, trauma, or fluorosis that occurred during the developmental stages of tooth formation. Another cause of
hypocalcification is arrested and remineralized incipient caries, which leaves an opaque, discolored, and hard
surface (see Fig. 9-15, C). When smooth and cleanable,
such areas do not warrant restorative intervention unless they are esthetically offensive to the patient. These
areas remain visible regardless if the tooth is wet or dry.
Recall that in contrast, the smooth surface incipient carious lesion also is opaque white when dried. Therefore
care must be exercised to distinguish the incipient carious lesion from nonhereditary developmental enamel
hypocalcification.
Chemical erosion is the loss of surface tooth structure by
chemical action in the continued presence of demineralizing agents (acids). The resulting defective surface
is smooth. Although these agents are predominant
causative factors, it is generally recognized that tooth-

FIG 9-11

Nonhereditary hypocalcified areas on facial surfaces.
These areas may result from numerous factors but do not warrant restorative intervention unless they are esthetically offensive or cavitation is present.

brushing is a contributing factor. Exogenous acidic
agents, such as lemon juice (by lemon sucking), cause
crescent or dished defects (rounded as opposed to
angular) on the surfaces of exposed teeth (Fig. 9-12, A),
while endogenous acidic agents, such as gastric fluids,
cause generalized erosion on the lingual, incisal, and occlusal surfaces (see Fig. 9-12, B). The latter defective surfaces are associated with the binge-purge syndrome in
bulimia, or with gastroesophageal reflux.
In contrast to chemical erosion, idiopathic erosion is
thought by some to explain the cervical, wedge-shaped
defect (angular as opposed to rounded) that is similar to
the defect customarily associated with toothbrush abrasion (subsequently presented), but where the predominant causative factor (as proposed) is heavy force in eccentric occlusion shown in an associated wear facet,
resulting in flexuring (elastic bending) of the tooth (see
Fig. 9-12, C). It is further hypothesized that the bending
force produces tension stress in the affected wedgeshaped region on the tooth side away from the tooth
bending direction, resulting in loss of surface tooth
structure by microfractures and is termed an "abfracture."z9 Proponents of this hypothesis also add that the
microfractures can foster loss of tooth structure from
toothbrush abrasion and from acids in the diet and/or
plaque. The resulting defect has smooth surfaces.

CHAPTER

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

FIG 9-12 Erosion. A, Crescent-shaped defects on enamel facial surfaces caused by exogenous
demineralizing agent (from sucking lemons several years previous to the time of the photograph). B, Generalized erosion caused by endogenous fluids. C, Idiopathic erosion lesion at the
DEJ is hypothesized to be associated with abnormal occlusal force. D, Wedge-shaped lesions
caused by abrasion from toothbrush. E, Generalized attrition caused by excessive functional or
parafunctional mandibular movements.

Abrasion is abnormal tooth surface loss resulting from
direct frictional forces between the teeth and external
objects, or from frictional forces between contacting
teeth in the presence of an abrasive medium. Such wear
is caused by improper brushing techniques or other
habits such as holding a pipe stem between the teeth, tobacco chewing, and chewing on hard objects such as
pens or pencils. Toothbrush abrasion is the most common example and is usually seen as a sharp wedgeshaped notch in the gingival portion of the facial aspects
of the teeth (see Fig. 9-12, D). The surface of the defect is
smooth. The presence of such defects does not automatically warrant intervention. Rather, it is important to determine and eliminate the cause.
Attrition is mechanical wear of the incisal or occlusal
tooth structure as a result of functional or parafunctional movements of the mandible. Although a certain
degree of attrition is expected with age, it is important
to note abnormally advanced attrition (see Fig. 9-12, E).
If significant abnormal attrition is present, the patient's
functional movements must be evaluated and inquiry
made about any habits creating this problem such as
tooth grinding, or bruxism, usually due to stress. In some
older patients, the enamel of the cusp tips (or incisal
edges) is worn off resulting in cupped-out areas because
the exposed, softer dentin wears faster than the surrounding enamel. Sometimes these areas are an annoyance because of food retention or the presence of peripheral, ragged, sharp enamel edges. Slowing such wear by
appropriate restorative treatment is indicated. The sharp
edges can result in tongue or cheek biting, and rounding

these edges does not resolve the problem but does improve comfort.
Fracture or craze lines in a tooth are often visible, especially with advancing age, and should be considered as
potential cleavage planes for possible future fractures.
Appropriate dye materials or light reflected from a dental mirror aid in detecting fracture lines. Any tooth that
has an extensive restoration and weakened cusps should
be identified as being susceptible to future fracture (Fig.
9-13) and should be considered for a cusp-protecting
restoration. Deep developmental fissures across marginal or cusp ridges are cleavage planes, especially in
the tooth weakened by caries or previous restoration. A
minor fracture of a tooth can often be treated by recontouring and polishing. If the fracture is more extensive,
the tooth should be restored. The examination and diagnosis of the incomplete fracture of a posterior tooth is
presented in a subsequent section, Examination of the
Patient in Pain.
The dental examination also may reveal dental anomalies that include variations in size, shape, structure, or
number of teeth such as dens in dente, macrodontia, microdontia, gemination, concrescence, dilaceration, amelogenesis
imperfecta, and dentinogenesis imperfecta. Thorough dis-

cussion of these anomalies is beyond the scope of this
text; the reader should refer to an oral pathology textbook for additional information.
Radiographic Examination of Teeth and Restora-

Dental radiographs are an indispensable part of
the contemporary dentist's diagnostic armamentarium.
As with most things in life, however, the use of diagnostions.

CHAPTER

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

Clinical Situations for Which
Radiographs May Be Indicated
Previous periodontal or root canal therapy
History of pain or trauma
Familial history of dental anomalies
Clinical evidence of periodontal disease
Large or deep restorations
Deep carious lesions
Malposed or clinically impacted teeth
Swelling
Mobility of teeth
Fistula or sinus tract infection
Growth abnormalities
Oral involvement in known or suspected systemic
disease
Evidence of foreign objects
Abutment teeth for fixed or removable partial prosthesis
Unexplained bleeding
Unexplained sensitivity of teeth
Unusual tooth morphology, calcification, or color
Missing teeth with unknown reason

tic ionizing radiation is not without risks. Exposure to
any amount of ionizing radiation can potentially result
in a range of adverse affects. Therefore the diagnostic
yield or potential benefit that could be gained from a radiograph must be weighed carefully against the financial costs and the potential adverse affects of exposure
to radiation. Several technologies including digital radiography are now available and are designed to enhance
diagnostic yield and reduce radiation exposure.
To assist the clinician with assessing the risks and
benefits, the FDA sponsored a panel of dental experts to
develop radiograph selection criteria for dental patients. Their report specifies guidelines based on patient
age and risk of dental disease for prescribing dental radiographs." As a general rule, patients at higher risk for
caries or periodontal disease should receive more frequent and more extensive radiographic surveys. Table
9-2, adapted from the FDA guidelines, lists the preferred
types of radiographs and the intervals at which they
should be used for the dentulous adult patient. Specific
clinical situations for which radiographs may be indicated are also shown in Box 9-1.
For diagnosis of proximal-surface caries, restoration
overhangs, or poorly contoured restorations, posterior
bitewing and anterior periapical radiographs are most
helpful. When interpreting the radiographic presentation of proximal tooth surfaces, it is necessary to know
the normal anatomic picture presented in a radiograph
before any abnormalities can be diagnosed. In a radiograph, proximal caries appears as a dark area or a radiolucency in the proximal enamel at or gingival to the
contact of the teeth (see Fig. 9-5, A). This radiolucency
typically is triangular and has its apex toward the den-

FIG . 9-13 Extensively restored teeth with weakened (a) and
fractured (b) cusps. Note the distal developmental fissure in
the second molar, which further predisposes the distal cusps
to fracture.

toenamel junction (DEJ). Moderate-to-deep occlusal caries can be seen as a radiolucency extending into dentin
(see Fig. 9-5, C). Some defective aspects of restorations
also may be identified radiographically These include
i mproper contour, overhangs (see Fig. 9-8), and recurrent
caries gingival to restorations (see Fig. 9-5, D). Pulpal
abnormalities such as pulp stones and internal resorption
may be identified in the anterior periapical radiographs
(Fig. 9-14, A and B). The height and integrity of the marginal periodontium may be evaluated from the bitewing
radiographs. Periapical radiographs are helpful in diagnosing changes in the periapical periodontium such
as periapical abscesses, dental granulomas, or cysts (see Fig.
9-14, C). Impacted third molars, supernumerary teeth,
and other congenital or acquired abnormalities also
may be discovered upon periapical radiographic examination. However, it should be kept in mind that the
sensitivity and specificity of dental radiographs will
vary according to the diagnostic task.
Always interpret dental radiographs cautiously. Remember the limitation imposed by interpreting a dental
fil m is that the film is a two-dimensional representation
of a three-dimensional mass. In addition, the dentist
should realize that the interpretation of dental radiographs would produce a certain number of false-positive
and false-negative diagnoses. For instance, misdiagnosis
can occur when cervical burnout (the radiographic picture
of the normal structure and contour of the cervical third
of the crown) mimics caries (Fig. 9-15, A through C).
Furthermore, a Class V lesion or a radiolucent toothcolored restoration may be radiographically superimposed on the proximal area, mimicking proximal caries
(Fig. 9-15, D and E). Finally, although caries may be more
extensive clinically than it appears radiographically, approximately 60% of teeth with radiographic proximal lesions in the outer half of dentin are likely to be noncavitated 53 and therefore treatable with remineralization
measures. Although radiographs are excellent diagnostic media, they do have limitations. The only way to
guard against these limitations is to continually correlate
clinical and radiographic findings.

CHAPTER

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

9-14 Pulpal abnormalities. A, Pulp stone. B, Internal resorption. C, Periapical abscess, granuloma, or cyst.
fIG

fIC

9-15 A, A misleading radiographic appearance can be caused by cervical burnout, which
mimics caries (a). B, Caries is not visible on a radiograph from a different angle (b). C, Caries
also not detectable clinically (c). Brown spot (bs) is a remineralized, arrested, incipient carious
l esion. D, A Class V lesion or tooth-colored restoration (d) can mimic proximal caries (E) by superimposing a radiolucent area on proximal aspect of tooth (e).

Adjunctive Aids for Examining Teeth and Restorations. Adjunctive aids or tests, such as the percussion
test, palpation, thermal tests, electric pulp test, and test preparation, are useful when further information is needed to
discern the health of the teeth and supporting structures. Remember, however, that these are only aids in
arriving at a diagnosis. Positive results on only one test
should not be considered conclusive because a test is

seldom 100% accurate. Rather, all available information,
including history, examination, radiographs, and other
test results, and comparable findings on adjacent and
contralateral teeth should be used in concert to confirm
the diagnosis.
A percussion test is performed by gently tapping the occlusal or incisal surfaces of the suspected tooth and adjacent teeth with the end of the handle of a mouth mirror

CHAPTER9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

FIG 9-16 Diagnostic aids for examining teeth. A, Percussion. B, Cold test. C, Heat test with hot
gutta-percha. D, Electric pulp test. E, Test preparation.

to determine the presence of tenderness (Fig. 9-16, A).
Pain on percussion suggests possible injury to the periodontal membrane from pulpal or periodontal inflammation. Care must be taken when interpreting a positive
response on maxillary teeth because teeth in close proxi mity to the maxillary sinuses also may exhibit pain on
percussion when the patient is suffering from maxillary
sinusitis.
Palpation is performed by rubbing the index finger
along the facial and lingual mucosa overlying the apical
region of the tooth. An alveolar abscess in an advanced
stage or other periapical pathosis may cause tenderness
to palpation. Palpation also can reveal nontender swellings that may be overlooked otherwise.
An indication of pulp vitality can be obtained through
the results of thermal tests, an electric pulp test, and a
test cavity. In addition, before any tooth is restored with
a casting, pulpal evaluation should be performed. To
conduct a thermal test, a cotton applicator tip sprayed
with a freezing agent (HistoFreeze, Fisher Brand, Fisher
Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA 15219) or hot gutta-percha is
applied directly to the tooth (see Fig. 9-16, B and C). Hot
and cold testing should elicit from the healthy pulp a response that will subside within a few seconds following
removal of the stimulus. Pain lasting 10 to 15 seconds or
less after stimulation by heat or cold suggests a hyperemia, an inflammation that may be reversed by timely
removal of the irritant. Intense pain of longer duration
from hot or cold usually suggests irreversible pulpitis,
which can only be treated by endodontic therapy or extraction. Pain that results from heat but is quickly relieved by cold also suggests irreversible pulpitis. Lack
of response to thermal tests may indicate that the pulp
is necrotic. Adjacent and/or contralateral unaffected

teeth should be tested for baseline comparisons because
the duration of pain may differ among individuals.
The electric pulp tester also has value in determining
the vitality of the dental pulp (see Fig. 9-16, D). The electric pulp tester is placed on the tooth and not on a
restoration. A small electric current delivered to the
tooth causes a tingling sensation when the pulp is vital
and no response when the pulp is nonvital. It is important to obtain readings on adjacent and contralateral
teeth so the tooth in question can be evaluated relative
to the responses of the other teeth. Results of an electric
pulp test should not be the sole basis for a pulpal diagnosis because false positives or false negatives can occur. Instead, electric pulp test results provide additional
information that, when combined with other findings,
may lead to a diagnosis. Electric pulp testing is sometimes not possible in teeth with large or full-coverage
restorations.
A test preparation can be performed to help in the evaluation of pulpal vitality when a large restoration in the
tooth may be resulting in false-negative responses with
other evaluation methods. This test in particular is an
option for diagnosing questionable pulpal vitality of a
tooth contemplated for a replacement casting restoration. By using a round bur and no anesthetic, a test
preparation is made through the existing restoration
into the dentin (see Fig. 9-16, E). Lack of sensitivity (response) when the dentin is cut may indicate a nonvital
pulp. However, sclerosed dentin can result in a falsenegative response. Moreover, on a multiple-rooted tooth,
one region of the dentin may respond, whereas there
may be no response at another site, possibly indicating
a degeneration of a portion of the pulp. Furthermore,
heat generated by the bur might cause a response, but

CHAPTER

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

the pulp may not be healthy. Although there are indications for the test preparation, its use and the diagnostic
information attained are limited.
When extensive restorative therapy is contemplated,
study casts are helpful in providing an understanding of
occlusal relationships, developing the treatment plan,
and educating the patient. Accurately mounted study
casts provide an opportunity for a thorough evaluation
of the tooth interdigitation, the functional occlusion,
and any occlusal abnormalities that may need treatment. For example, study casts provide for further evaluation of the plane of occlusion; tilted, rotated, or extruded teeth; cross-bites; plunger cusps; wear facets and
defective restorations; coronal contours; proximal contacts; and embrasure spaces between the teeth. Combined with clinical and radiographic findings, study
casts allow the practitioner to develop a treatment plan
without the patient present, thus saving valuable chair
time. When a proposed plan of treatment is discussed
with the patient, study casts can be valuable educational
media in helping the patient understand and visualize
existing conditions and the need for proposed treatment.
Additional aids for diagnosis of additional problems
are discussed in later sections of this chapter, and these
include transillumination, the biting test, mobility testing, the anesthetic test, and occlusal analysis.
REVIEW OF PERIODONTIUM

Determination of operative treatment should occur only
after the status of the periodontium has been evaluated.
Because the periodontium and the teeth must exist in a
mutually beneficial physiologic environment, an accurate diagnosis of the periodontal condition is critical to
the planning of operative treatment.
Clinical Examination. The periodontium is evaluated
clinically through a series of steps. The gingival color
and texture are important indices of periodontal health.
Healthy gingiva is light pink in color, firm, knife-edged,
and stippled, whereas unhealthy gingiva is often red;
soft; edematous; and has a glazed, smooth surface. The
depth of the gingival sulcus around each tooth is determined by systematic probing using a specialized instrument (periodontal probe) having a round-ended, thin

shaft with millimeter indications (Fig. 9-17, A). A patient
may be screened for periodontal disease using the periodontal screening and recording (PSR) technique . 31,41 In
using the PSR, the examiner measures the sulcus depth
around selected teeth and records the worse affected site
in each sextant using a 1 to 4 system. If certain thresholds
are met, a complete periodontal examination is conducted. In a complete examination, the sulcus depth is
assessed at six locations around each tooth, three facially (mesiofacial, midfacial, distofacial), and three lingually (mesiolingual, midlingual, and distolingual). A
sulcus depth greater than 3 mm and sites that bleed
upon probing should be recorded in the patient's chart
(see Fig. 9-2, C). The presence of a pocket (a sulcus depth
greater than 3 mm) or the presence of hemorrhage or exudate may indicate periodontal disease.
The next step in probing is to evaluate the presence of
bifurcation or trifurcation involvement. These regions
should be explored with a furcation probe and classified
according to the amount of penetration. The presence of
furcation involvement reduces the long-term prognosis
of the tooth and affects the restorative treatment plan.
After probing is completed, it is imperative to note
areas of gingival recession and areas with a minimum or
lack of attached gingiva, especially if these areas are
near a tooth surface that requires a subgingival restorative margin (see Fig. 9-17, B). With a lack of attached
gingiva in these areas, restorative manipulations such as
margination, temporization, and impressions are more
difficult and can further aggravate the gingival problem
(see Fig. 9-17, C).
Teeth should be evaluated for mobility and noted
with appropriate classification (1, 2, or 3). Class 1 mobility is barely distinguishable mobility (physiologic) in
a faciolingual direction of only a few tenths of a millimeter (total); class 2 is mobility (nonphysiologic) in
any transverse direction greater than a few tenths up to
1 mm; and class 3 mobility (nonphysiologic) is greater
than 1 mm in any transverse direction. Teeth that can be
depressed or rotated also are scored as class 3. Mobility
signifies loss of bone support or the result of improper
occlusal forces, either of which could affect subsequent
operative treatment. The occlusal relationship of the

FIG 9-17 Periodontal examination. A, Probing to measure sulcus depth. B, Lack of attached gingiva next to a tooth requiring restoration with a subgingival margin. C, Gingival recession.

CHAPTER

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

teeth should be closely evaluated. Well-positioned occlusal contacts are necessary to prevent occlusal trauma
to the periodontium. Nonphysiologic mobility observed
during functional contacts should be recorded because
this information is useful in treatment planning.
The presence of plaque, debris, and inflammation, and
the general level of home care must be noted for two
reasons. First, the teeth cannot be properly restored
when they are covered by debris and surrounded by unhealthy tissues that bleed easily. The gingiva should be
firm and healthy so that restorative procedures can be
performed in a clean, dry field. Second, the long-term
prognosis of any operative treatment is highly dependent on the long-term periodontal health and the patient's ability to keep the restoration and tooth surfaces
clean.
Restorations should be correctly contoured to maintain
proper periodontal health. Proximal, facial, and lingual
surfaces should not be overcontoured because such contouring can impinge on the soft tissue or act as a plaque
trap. Physiologic proximal contacts should be achieved
to prevent interproximal food impaction and tooth
movement and to foster during mastication proper
movement of food facially and lingually as a result of
correct lingual, occlusal, and facial embrasures.
Radiographic Examination. Radiographs are another
valuable aid in assessing periodontal health. Bitewing
radiographs, exposed at the proper angulation, are the
best means of radiographically assessing bone levels.
Vertical bitewing radiographs are recommended for patients with periodontitis involving substantial bone loss.
Localized or generalized bone loss, vertical or horizontal, should be noted.
Radiographs aid in determining the relationship between the margins of existing or proposed restorations
and the bone. A biologic width of at least 2 mm is required
for the junctional epithelium and connective tissue attachments located between the base of the sulcus and
the alveolar bone crest (Fig. 9-18, A). In addition to this
physiologic dimension, the restoration margin should
be placed occlusally as far away as possible from the
base of the sulcus to foster gingival health. Encroachment on this biologic width may cause breakdown and
apical migration of the attachment apparatus. The attachment breakdown and apical migration are in response to the inflammatory process caused by bacterial
plaque that accumulates at the inaccessible restoration
margins. The final position of a proposed gingival margin, which is dictated by the existing restoration, caries,
or retention features, must be estimated to determine if
crown-lengthening procedures are indicated before restoration (see Fig. 9-18, B). These procedures involve the
surgical removal of the gingiva and/or bone to create a
longer clinical crown, and thus provide more tooth structure for placing the restoration margin and for increasing retention form.

Because of the obvious importance of the periodontium, operative procedures must continually be performed with respect, understanding, and concern for
the periodontium. Therefore the relationship of the periodontium and operative procedures always must be
considered.

EXAMINATION OF OCCLUSION
Several reasons exist for completing a thorough occlusal
examination for developing an analysis and understanding of the patient's occlusion before initiating restorative
care. First, the operator can establish the patient's presenting condition before any alterations. This documentation includes the identification of signs of occlusal
trauma, such as enamel cracks or tooth mobility, and notation of occlusal abnormalities that contribute to pathologic conditions, such as bone loss. Second, the potential
effect of proposed restorative treatment on the occlusion
can be assessed. For example, the potential of proposed
restorations to provide a beneficial and harmonious occlusion must be determined. Third, the effect of the current occlusal scheme on proposed restorative treatment

FIG . 9-18

A, Biologic width (a) is the physiologic dimension
needed for the junctional epithelium (d) and the connective
tissue attachment (e), which is measured from the base of the
sulcus (c) to the level of the bone crest (f). The margin of the
restoration (b) must not violate this dimension. B, Tooth with
an existing restoration (g) that encroaches on the biologic
width requires crown-lengthening procedures before placement of a new restoration.

CHAPTER

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

can be identified, and the existing occlusion altered if
needed before placement of restorations.
The static and dynamic occlusion must be carefully
examined (see Chapter 2). Although not all occlusal
abnormalities require treatment, the clinician always
must be able to identify deviations from normal and be
prepared to treat, refer, or make allowances for these
problems in any planned therapy. A description of the
patient's static anatomic occlusion in maximum intercuspation (MI), including the relationship of the molars
and canines (Angle's Classes 1, 11, or III), and the
amount of vertical overlap (overbite) and horizontal overlap (overjet) of the anterior teeth should be recorded.
The presence of missing teeth and the relationship of the
maxillary and mandibular midlines should be evaluated. The appropriateness of the occlusal plane and
the positions of malposed teeth should be identified.
Supererupted teeth, spacing, fractured teeth, and marginal ridge discrepancies should be noted. The dynamic
functional occlusion in all movements of the mandible
(right, left, forward, and all excursions in between)
should be evaluated. This evaluation also includes assessing the relationship of the teeth in centric relation,
which is when the condyle head is in its most retruded
(unforced) contact position. Functional movements of
the mandible are evaluated to determine if canine guidance or group function exists. The presence and amount
of anterior guidance is evaluated to note the degree of potential posterior disclusion. Non-working side contacts
are recorded so that they may be eliminated and any
planned restorative care for involved teeth will not perpetuate these contacts. Any mobility of teeth during
function is identified. Movement of the mandible from
maximum intercuspation to maximum opening is observed; any clicking of the joint(s) during such movement may be an indication of a pathologic condition.
Teeth are examined for abnormal wear patterns. If
signs of abnormal wear are present, the patient is queried
as to the presence of any contributing habits such as
nocturnal bruxism or parafunctional habits. The examination also should disclose possible unfavorable occlusal
relationships, such as a plunger cusp, which is a pointed
cusp "plunging" deep into the occlusal plane of the opposing arch. A plunger cusp may be contacting the
lower of two adjacent marginal ridges of different levels, or contacting directly between two adjacent marginal ridges in maximum intercuspation, or positioned
in a deep fossa. These may result in food impaction or
tooth/ restoration fracture.
The results of the occlusal analysis should be included in the dental record and considered in the
restorative treatment plan. Acceptable aspects of the
occlusion must be preserved and not altered during
treatment. When possible, improvement of the occlusal
relationship is desirable; assuredly, abnormalities must
not be perpetuated in the restorative treatment.

EXAMINATION OF THE PATIENT IN PAIN
One of the most perplexing yet challenging problems a
dentist encounters is the treatment of patients who have
pain in the jaws or teeth. Such problems often can test
the dentist's diagnostic skills. The cause of discomfort
must be determined before relief can be provided. The
problem can be identified and treated by carefully piecing together subjective information from the patient and
objective information from the clinical examination supplemented with appropriate diagnostic tests.
Regardless of whether the patient is new to the practice or is a patient of record, the medical history must be
reviewed to identify potential health-related problems.
The patient is then asked to describe various characteristics of the pain, particularly: (1) the onset and duration,
(2) stimuli, (3) spontaneity, (4) intensity, and (5) factors
that relieve it (Box 9-2). After carefully listening to the
patient's thorough description of the nature of the problem, the practitioner guides the discussion to obtain
more information. During this discussion the dentist begins to formulate an idea about the potential cause of
the pain and a means for verifying it. Care should be
taken, however, not to focus too quickly; instead, all possible sources of pain must be considered: systemic, pulpal, periapical, periodontal, restorative, degenerative,
and neoplastic.
After assessing the subjective symptoms described by
the patient and developing a preliminary diagnosis, the
dentist should apply objective tests to confirm the diagnosis. These include a percussion test to determine possible inflammation in the periodontal ligament (PDL),
palpation to examine for any tenderness in the apical region, and transillumination to check for cracks or caries
in the tooth as well as for tooth color changes that may
indicate loss of vitality. If a tooth is suspected of having
a pulpal problem, electric pulp testing combined with
thermal testing may assist in the diagnosis. Periodontal
probing helps rule out periodontal abscess. The integrity
of restorations is evaluated by examining them for fractures, recurrent caries, wear marks, shiny spots, or mobility (looseness).
One of the more challenging diagnostic problems is to
locate the offending, posterior tooth that has an incomplete fracture not directly involving the pulp chamber/
canal(s) of a vital pulp. If the chief complaint is, "When
I chew on this side it hurts," the examiner must be especially alert for an incomplete fracture of a vital posterior
tooth. Frequently the patient gives a history of seeking
relief from the dentist over an extended period. Sensitivity to cold usually is an additional complaint. All
fracture lines in the enamel of the teeth on the affected
side of the arches, maxillary and mandibular, should be
noted. Such lines usually are found in the remaining
enamel of teeth weakened by extensive caries or restorations. Particularly suspect are those fracture lines emanating from enamel developmental fissures (natural

CHAPTER 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

Patient Inventory for Diagnosing Dental Pain

*Tooth Slooth and Tooth Slooth II, Professional Results, Inc., Laguna Niguel, California.

CHAPTER 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

cleavage planes), extending through marginal or cusp
ridges, and then extending gingivally in axial surface
enamel, thus leaving the included cusps liable to this incomplete fracture under occlusal load (Fig. 9-19). The
incompletely fractured cusp causes sharp pain when masticatory pressure is released resulting in the fractured dentinal surfaces rubbing together creating hydrodynamic
pressures in the dentinal tubules to thus elicit pulpal
pain; also, the fractured dentinal surfaces become hypersensitive because of salivary contamination. Often it
is difficult to determine which tooth is affected; however, a differential diagnosis frequently can be made
with a biting test. This is accomplished by placing the
Tooth Slooth (Tooth Slooth and Tooth Slooth 11, Profes-

sional Results, Inc., Laguna Niguel, California) over
each suspect cusp and asking the patient to bite and
then release (see Fig. 9-19, A and B). Sharp pain on release of pressure helps to identify the offending tooth
and its partially fractured component. Typically, if the
fracture does not enter the dental pulp or is not in the
root, a properly designed cast restoration (with extracoronal resistance features) often provides relief, because the fractured part is either removed during preparation or is encompassed by the restoration.
An incomplete fracture that exposes the vital pulp of a posterior tooth is characterized by symptoms different from
those given for an incomplete fracture without pulpal
exposure; in a short time the former will result in severe,

FIG . 9-19 A, The Tooth Slooth is used to detect an incomplete fracture of a posterior tooth. The
end with the small divot or depression is placed on the suspected cusp. The patient is instructed
to close so that the opposite tooth engages the grooved, flat side of the Tooth Slooth. B, The patient is instructed to apply biting pressure on the plastic instrument and to move the mandible
slowly side to side and then release quickly. C, Tooth that yielded a positive response to the rubber wheel test, indicating a possible incomplete fracture. D, Removal of existing restoration confirms diagnosis of an incomplete fracture.

PLATE 9-1 I ntraoral and extraoral manifestations associated with communicable diseases.
A, Primary herpetic gingivostomatitis. B, Herpes simplex lesions (gingival mucosa). C, Herpes
l abialis. D, Herpetic whitlow (index finger). E, Chickenpox (rash on the trunk). F, Chickenpox (ginPlate continued next page.
gival lesion).

PLATE 9-1, continued from previous page. G, Herpes zoster (shingles), supraorbital dermatome distribution. H, Condylomata acuminatum ( also called venereal warts). I, Pseudomembranous candidiasis (facial mucosa). J, Hairy leukoplakia (lateral border of the tongue).
K, Kaposi's sarcoma (maxillary palate). L, Linear gingival erythema. (A, E, and F, Courtesy of
Dr. William F. Vann; 8 and C, Courtesy of Dr. Lauren Patton; D, Courtesy of Dr. James Crawford;
G, Courtesy of Dr. Diane C. Shugars; H to K, Courtesy of Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta; L, Courtesy of Dr. James R. Winkler.)

CHAPTER

9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

almost constant, throbbing pain from irreversible pulpitis. Sometimes temporary relief follows pulpal death,
but intervention therapies of root canal treatment or
tooth extraction are indicated for long-term success. The
choice of these therapies depends on several factors, including restorability, usefulness, supporting tissue, and
patient preferences.
If the patient is unable to localize the arch in which
the offending tooth is located, an anesthetic test may be
used. The suspected tooth is anesthetized to determine
if the patient gains any relief. If the symptoms subside,
the offending tooth likely has been identified.
Exposed root surfaces can result in sharp, annoying
pain. For treatment refer to the later section Treatment
of Root Surface Sensitivity.
Along with a discussion of the patient's symptoms
and a thorough clinical examination and the use of adj unctive tests, a radiograph of the involved region may
provide additional information. Radiographs are useful
in identifying significant interdental or periradicular
bone loss associated with pulpal pathosis. Also, deep
restorations and pulpal abnormalities can be detected
through radiographic evaluation.
After diagnosis of the probable cause of pain, appropriate treatment should be instituted. Occasionally,
examination findings may be so inconclusive that the
patient may need to be advised that no definitive treatment is indicated at the moment and that it is best to
wait for the symptoms to change or localize. Finally,
treatment should be as conservative as possible. This
means that unless otherwise indicated, the most palliative form of treatment should be initiated first.
A thorough and exacting examination of the orofacial
soft tissue, teeth, periodontium, and occlusion provides
adequate information on which to base a diagnosis. Only
after abnormalities of these structures are diagnosed
and recorded should the treatment planning process begin. A treatment plan and subsequent treatment are
only as effective as the quality of information obtained
during the examination.
TREATMENT PLANNING
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

A treatment plan is a carefully sequenced series of services designed to eliminate or control etiologic factors,
repair existing damage, and create a functional, maintainable environment (see Fig. 9-2, C). A sound treatment plan depends on thorough patient evaluation,
dentist expertise, understanding of indications and contraindications, and a prediction of the patient's response
to treatment. An accurate prognosis for each tooth and
for the patient's overall dental health is central to a successful treatment plan. To establish a prognosis, the practitioner must be able to forecast possible results given

the patient's current condition and knowledge of the
possible outcomes of contemplated treatment.
The development of a dental treatment plan for a patient consists of four steps: (1) examination and problem
identification, (2) decision to recommend intervention,
(3) identification of treatment alternatives, and (4) selection of the treatment with the patient's involvement.
Step one, examination and diagnosis, discussed in detail
in the second part of this chapter, results in a list of dental problems. Step two, deciding to intervene, is dependent upon a determination that a tooth is diseased, restoration is defective, or that either tooth or restoration is
at some increased risk of further deterioration if intervention does not occur. If any of these conditions exist,
then intervention is recommended to the patient. Step
three, identification of treatment alternatives, involves
establishing the list of one or more reasonable interventions from the set of possible alternatives. Treatment alternatives for a specific condition can include periodic
reevaluation to monitor the condition, chemotherapeutics (e.g., applications of fluoride to promote remineralization or antimicrobials to reduce bacteria), recontouring defective restorations or irregular tooth surfaces,
repair (patching a defective restoration), and restoration.
This list of reasonable treatment alternatives is based
on the current knowledge of the effectiveness of the
treatment, the prevailing standards of care, and both
clinical and nonclinical patient factors. Step four, selection of the treatment, is conducted in consultation with
the patient. The patient is advised of the reasonable
treatment alternatives and their related risks and benefits. After the patient is fully informed, the doctor and
patient can select a course of action that is most appropriate for that patient.
Treatment plans are influenced by patient preferences,
motivation, systemic health, emotional status, and financial capabilities. The dentist's knowledge, experience,
and training; laboratory support; dentist-patient compatibility; the availability of specialists; and functional,
esthetic, and technical demands also can modify a treatment plan. Even when modification is necessary, the
practitioner is ethically and professionally responsible
for providing the best level of care possible. For instance, if a tooth ideally should be treated with a cast
restoration but the patient is unable to afford this care,
then optimal treatment would consist of a large, multisurface, amalgam or composite restoration. Although
this is optimal rather than ideal treatment, it does not
give the dentist license to perform an inadequate restoration. The best restoration possible should be done
under the circumstances.
Finally, a treatment plan is not a static list of services.
Rather, it is a multiphase and dynamic series of events.
Its success is determined by its suitableness to meet the
patient's initial and long-term needs. A treatment plan

CHAPTER9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

should allow for reevaluation and be adaptable to meet
the changing needs, preferences, and health conditions
of the patient. Therefore the patient must realize that the
plan may have to be altered as conditions change.
TREATMENT PLAN SEQUENCING
Treatment plan sequencing is the process of scheduling
the needed procedures into a time frame. Proper sequencing is a critical component of a successful treatment plan. Certain treatments must naturally follow
others in a logical order, while other treatments can or
must occur concurrently and thus require coordination.
Complex treatment plans often should be sequenced in
phases, including an urgent phase, a control phase, a reevaluation phase, a definitive phase, and a maintenance phase.
However, for most patients, the first three phases are accomplished as a single phase.
Generally, the concept of "greatest need" guides the
order in which treatment is sequenced. This concept dictates that what the patient needs most is performed first.
Urgent Phase. The urgent phase of care begins with
a thorough review of the patient's medical condition
and history. As described earlier in the chapter, a patient
presenting with swelling, pain, bleeding, or infection
should have these problems managed as soon as possible and certainly before initiation of subsequent phases.
Control Phase. The control phase of treatment is
meant to: (1) eliminate active disease such as caries and
inflammation, (2) remove conditions preventing maintenance, (3) eliminate potential causes of disease, and
(4) begin preventive dentistry activities. The goals of
this phase are to remove etiologic factors and stabilize
the patient's dental health. Examples of control phase
treatment include extractions; endodontics; periodontal
debridement and scaling; occlusal adjustment as needed;
caries removal; replacement or repair of defective restorations, such as those with gingival overhangs; and use of
caries control measures (as described in Chapter 3).
As part of the control phase, the dentist should develop a plan for the management and prevention of
dental caries. After the patient's caries status and caries
risk have been determined, chemical, surgical, behavioral, mechanical, and dietary techniques (Box 9-3) can
be used to improve host resistance and alter the oral
flora. Chapter 3 presents a detailed discussion of caries
diagnosis, prevention, treatment, and control.
Reevaluation Phase. The holding phase is a time between the control and definitive phases that allows for
resolution of inflammation and time for healing. Home
care habits are reinforced, motivation for further treatment is assessed, and initial treatment and pulpal responses are reevaluated before definitive care is begun.
Definitive Phase. After the dentist reassesses initial
treatment and determines the need for further care, the
patient enters the corrective or definitive phase of treatment. This may include endodontic, periodontic, ortho-

dontic, oral surgical, and operative procedures before
fixed or removable prosthodontic treatment. This phase
is discussed in detail in a following section, Interdisciplinary Considerations in Operative Treatment Planning.
Maintenance Phase. This phase includes regular recall examinations that (1) may reveal the need for adj ustments to prevent future breakdown and (2) provide
an opportunity to reinforce home care. The frequency of
reevaluation examinations during the maintenance phase
depends in large part on the patient's risk for dental disease. A patient who has stable periodontal health and a
recent history of no caries should have longer intervals
(e.g., 9 to 12 months or longer) between recall visits.
In contrast, those at high risk for dental caries and/or
periodontal breakdown should be examined much
more frequently (e.g., 3 to 4 months).
I NTERDISCIPLINARY CONSIDERATIONS IN
OPERATIVE TREATMENT PLANNING
When an operative procedure is performed during the
control or definitive phases, there are general guidelines
for when operative treatment should occur relative to
other forms of care. Following is a discussion of how to
sequence operative care with endodontic, periodontal,
orthodontic, oral surgical, and prosthodontic treatments.
Endodontics. All teeth to be restored with large or
cast restorations should have a pulpal/periapical evaluation. If indicated, they should have endodontic treatment before restoration is completed. Also, a tooth previously endodontically treated that shows no evidence
of healing, or has an inadequate fill, or a fill exposed to
oral fluids should be evaluated for retreatment before
restorative therapy is initiated.
Periodontics. Generally, periodontal treatment should
precede operative care, especially when improved oral

Prevention and Management of Caries
Chemical-Use of antimicrobial agents to alter the
oral flora and administration of topical fluoride to
sti mulate remineralization
Surgical-Removal of diseased tooth structure
and replacement of missing tooth structure with
restorative material
Behavioral-Application of appropriate techniques
to help the patient develop the skills, knowledge,
and attitudes to alter deleterious dietary intake
and improve oral hygiene
Mechanical-Mechanical alteration of tooth surfaces
at high risk (e.g., sealants), removal of overhangs,
reestablishment of proximal contacts, and restoration of defective contours
Dietary-Alteration of the character of the diet
Other-Stimulation of salivary flow through increased chewing, alteration of medications, and
use of artificial saliva

CHAPTER 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

hygiene, initial scaling, and root planing procedures can
create a more desirable environment for performing operative treatment. Obviously a tooth with a questionable periodontal prognosis should not receive an extensive restoration until periodontal treatment provides a
more favorable prognosis. However, if a tooth has a
good periodontal prognosis, operative treatment can occur before or after periodontal treatment as long as the
operative treatment is not compromised by the existing
tissue condition. Treatment of deep carious lesions often
requires caries control, amalgam or composite foundations, temporization and/or root canal therapy before
periodontal treatment. The correction of gross restorative defects in restoration contours (such as open contacts, gingival overhangs, and poor embrasure form) is
considered a part of initial periodontal therapy, and
such corrections enhance a favorable tissue response. If
periodontal surgical procedures are required, permanent
restorations such as inlays/onlays, crowns, and prostheses should be delayed until the surgical phase is completed. However, teeth planned for cast restorations can
be prepared and temporized before periodontal surgery.
This approach permits confirmation of the restoration
prognosis before surgery and allows improved access
for the surgical procedure.
Patients with gingivitis and early periodontitis
generally respond favorably to improved oral hygiene
and scaling/root planing procedures. More advanced
periodontitis patients may require surgical pocket
elimination /reduction procedures or various regenerative procedures. An increase in the zones of attached
gingiva and the elimination of abnormal frenal tension
should be provided by corrective periodontal surgical
procedures around teeth receiving restorations with subgingival margins. In addition, any teeth requiring restorations that may encroach on the biologic width of periodontium should have appropriate crown-lengthening
surgical procedures performed before the final restoration is placed. Usually a minimum of 6 weeks is required
following the surgery before final restorative procedures.
Orthodontics. Orthodontic therapy may include
extrusion or realignment of teeth to provide favorable
interdental spacing, stress distribution, function, and
esthetics. All teeth should be free of caries before orthodontic banding. Treatment of caries may include
the placement of amalgam and composite restorations.
There are few indications for cast restorations before
orthodontic treatment is completed.
Oral Surgery. In most instances impacted, unerupted,
and hopelessly involved teeth should be removed before operative treatment. This is especially true when
second molars that are to receive cast restorations may
be damaged or dislodged during removal of third molars. In addition, soft tissue lesions, complicating exostoses, and improperly contoured ridge areas should be
eliminated or corrected before final restorative care.

Occlusion. The occlusion should be evaluated and, if
indicated, adjusted to establish a static anatomic occlusion with stable maximum intercuspation that is nearly
coincident with retruded contact position. This includes
eliminating nonfunctional interferences and establishing
appropriate guidance patterns before extensive restorative therapy is undertaken. Occlusal adjustment should
occur before the definitive restoration phase but may occur at any time (see Occlusion in Chapter 2).
Fixed and Removable Prosthodontics. Preferably,
restorations should be completed before placing cast
restorations. Occasionally, a large amalgam or composite restoration is placed as a foundation (see Chapters 13
and 19) to provide improved retention for a full crown.
For use as a foundation, retention features must be
placed well inside the restoration so the material will remain after preparation for a crown. In removable prosthodontic dentistry, tooth preparations and restorations

should allow for the design of the removable partial denture.

This includes allowance for rests, guide planes, and
clasps. Moreover, the design of the operative restoration
and the selection of appropriate restorative materials
must correlate with design of the contemplated removable prosthesis.
I NDICATIONS FOR OPERATIVE TREATMENT

In the development of an operative treatment plan, all information must be assessed before making tooth-specific
decisions. The following sections provide general guidelines for operative treatment planning. Specific indications for restorations will be reviewed in the chapters in
which those restorations are discussed. It should be
noted that the benefits of bonding materials to tooth
structure have resulted in increased emphasis to at least
seal all prepared tooth structures, and, in most cases to
actually bond the restorative material. This approach includes not only composite restorations, but also many
amalgam and indirect restorations.
Operative Preventive Treatment. Before discussing
restorative care, it is important to emphasize that the primary goal of dentistry is to prevent disease, and thus operative preventive treatment is emphasized. As described in
detail in Chapter 3, a caries-preventive program should
be instituted for the caries-active or high-risk patient
(see Box 9-3). This program should include altering the
oral environment to encourage remineralization of incipient smooth-surface lesions and treating caries-prone pits
and fissures and incipient pit-and-fissure caries with
sealants. (Recall from Chapter 3 that incipient lesions are
entirely within enamel.) Therefore, occurrence of new lesions decreases along with remineralization of incipient
lesions as bacterial habitats are disrupted daily, diet is
improved, and fluoride is incorporated into the enamel.
The rationale for these treatments is described in Chapter 3, and the technique for sealant application is presented in Chapter 13. Also, extensive acute caries must

CHAPTER 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

be immediately eradicated by the caries control restoration (described in Chapter 3) to help suppress the infectious disease.
Restoration of Incipient Lesions. Although nonsurgical measures are the treatment of choice for managing
incipient carious lesions, several criteria may indicate
that tooth preparation and restoration are indicated.
These criteria are used to assess present and future carious activity of the lesion. An experienced clinician is
able to judge patient factors and make a decision as to
whether sufficient indication exists to treat the lesion by
a restoration. Poor oral hygiene and a low frequency of routine dental care in unmotivated patients would suggest restoration of some incipient lesions to prevent continued
deterioration. A history of caries or numerous restorations
on the contralateral surfaces or throughout the mouth
may suggest that the incipient lesion should be restored.
If there is a distinct variation in color when the area is
transilluminated and cavitation or a defect is present, the
lesion no longer is incipient and should be restored.
Also, if radiographic evidence indicates that the lesion
extends to the DEJ, the lesion should be assessed carefully and if appropriate, restored as early and as conservatively as possible to preserve the strength and esthetics
of the remaining tooth. Finally, the degree of caries susceptibility and the age of the patient also must be considered. If caries susceptibility is low or if the patient is free
of caries, the lesion is judged to be at lower risk and
should not be restored, but appropriate recording, initiation of remineralization strategies, and regular periodic monitoring are indicated.
Esthetic Treatment. Among many segments of the
U.S. population, interest in improved esthetics is growing. As a result, a range of treatments has been developed
to manage a wide array of esthetic concerns. Chapter 15
describes these conservative esthetic treatments. They
include esthetic recontouring of the anterior teeth, vital
bleaching, and microabrasion. These conservative approaches have well-documented outcomes. In addition

to these conservative techniques, advances in direct composite restorations have permitted the closure of diastemas, recontouring of teeth, and other tooth additions
by means other than extensive full-coverage restorations.
Treatment of Abrasion, Erosion, and Attrition.

Abraded or eroded areas should be considered for restoration only if one or more of the following exists: (1) the
area is cariously involved, (2) the defect is sufficiently
deep to compromise the structural integrity of the tooth,
(3) intolerable sensitivity exists and is unresponsive to
conservative desensitizing measures, (4) the defect contributes to a periodontal problem, (5) the area is to be
involved in the design of a removable partial denture,
(6) the depth of the defect is judged to be close to the
pulp, or (7) the patient desires esthetic improvements.
Areas of significant attrition that are worn into dentin
and are sensitive or annoying should be considered for
restoration. However, before cast restorations are used,
a complete occlusal analysis and an in-depth interview
with the patient regarding the etiology should be conducted to reduce contributing factors. Also, biteguard
therapy should be considered.
Treatment of Root-Surface Caries. Root caries is not
uncommon in geriatric and postperiodontal treatment
patients. Increases in the number of geriatric patients in
the patient population and tooth retention have emphasized this growing problem. Areas with root-surface caries usually should be restored when there is clinical or
radiographic evidence of cavitation. However, care must
be exercised to distinguish the active root-surface carious lesion from the root-surface lesion that once was active but has become inactive (arrested) (Fig. 9-20, A
and B). The latter lesion shows eburnated dentin (sclerotic
dentin) that has darkened from extrinsic staining, is firm
to the touch of an explorer, may be rough but is cleanable, and is seen in patients (usually older) whose oral
hygiene and diet in recent years are good. Generally
these lesions should not be restored except when the patient elects.

FIG 9-20 A, Arrested, root surface carious lesion (40 years old) (a) showing darkened, eburnated (sclerotic) dentin. Lesion should not be restored unless esthetically objectionable. Also a
gold inlay restoration (20 years old) (b) and amalgam restoration (36 years old) (c). B, Same patient as shown in A, but 12 years later (lesion 52 years old, gold inlay 32 years old, amalgam
restoration 48 years old). C, Arrested carious lesions on facial surface of canine. Both lesions
feel hard to explorer, are cleanable, and should not be restored except to improve esthetics.

CHAPTER 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

If it is determined that the lesion needs restoration, it
can be restored with amalgam or tooth-colored materials. Dentin adhesive restorative materials have enhanced
the restorative treatment of root-surface caries.
Obviously prevention is preferred over restoration. It
is recommended that appropriate preventive steps, such
as improvements in diet and oral hygiene and fluoride
treatment with or without cementoplasty,46 be taken in
hopes of avoiding carious breakdown and the need for
restoration.
Treatment of Root-Surface Sensitivity. It is not unusual for patients to complain of root-surface sensitivity,
which is annoying sharp pain usually associated with
gingival recession and exposed root surfaces. Several
theories have been advanced to explain the unusual sensitivity and response of such exposed dentin to a stimulus or irritation. The most accepted theory is the hydrodynamic theory, which postulates that the pain results from
indirect innervation caused by dentinal fluid movement
in the tubules that stimulates mechanoreceptors near the
predentin (see the Pulp-Dentin Complex in Chapter 2).
Some of the causes of such fluid shifts are temperature
change, air-drying, and osmotic pressure. Any treatment
that can reduce these fluid shifts by partially or totally occluding the tubules may help reduce the sensitivity.
Dentinal hypersensitivity is a particular problem in
patients immediately after periodontal surgery that results in the clinical exposure of root surfaces. Numerous
forms of treatment have been used to provide relief, such
as topical fluoride, fluoride rinses, oxalate solutions, dentin bonding agents, sealants, iontophoresis, and desensitizing toothpastes. Although all of these methods have
met with varying degrees of success, dentin-bonding
agents provide the best rate of success. When these
conservative methods fail to provide relief, restorative
treatment is indicated.
Repairing and Resurfacing Existing Restorations.

Many times amalgam, composite, or cast restorations
can be repaired or recontoured as opposed to complete
removal and replacement. There is growing evidence to
suggest that the removal and replacement results in the
"cycle of rerestoration" that leads to larger and larger
tooth preparations and the resultant trauma to the tooth
and supporting structures.' In addition, resurfacing or
repair of composites, as well as repair of cast restorations, have been shown to be effective .23 In addition,
amalgam restorations with localized defects can be repaired with amalgam or with unfilled sealant resins .44
Thus if a restoration has an isolated defect, which when
explored operatively can be confirmed that all carious
tooth structure has been removed, it is acceptable and
many times preferable to repair or recontour. Further reshaping of overcontoured restorations is an acceptable
form of treatment.
Replacement of Existing Restorations. Generally, a
restoration should not be replaced unless: (1) it has sig-

nificant discrepancies, (2) the tooth is at risk for caries
or fracture, or (3) the restoration is an etiologic factor
to adjacent teeth or tissue .4 In many instances, recontouring or resurfacing the existing restoration can delay replacement.
Some indications for replacing restorations are as follows: (1) marginal void, especially in the gingival one
third, that cannot be repaired; (2) poor proximal contour
or a gingival overhang that contributes to periodontal
breakdown; (3) a marginal ridge discrepancy that contributes to food impaction; (4) overcontour of a facial or
lingual surface resulting in plaque gingival to the height
of contour and resultant inflammation of gingiva overprotected from rubbing-cleansing action of food bolus
or toothbrush; (5) poor proximal contact that is either
open, resulting in interproximal food impaction and inflammation of impacted gingival papilla, or improper in
location or size; (6) recurrent caries that cannot be adequately treated by a repair restoration; and (7) ditching
deeper than 0.5 mm of the occlusal amalgam margin
that is judged carious or caries-prone. By itself, the presence of shallow ditching around an amalgam restoration is not an indication for replacement.
Indications for replacing tooth-colored restorations
include: (1) improper contours that cannot be repaired,
(2) large voids, (3) deep marginal staining, (4) recurrent
caries, and (5) unacceptable esthetics. Restorations that
have only light marginal staining and are judged noncarious can be corrected by a shallow, narrow, marginal
repair restoration.
I ndications for Amalgam Restorations. Dental
amalgam has proven to be a very good restorative material. Although its indications for use have decreased, it
is still recognized as a successful restorative material.
The use of amalgam in dentistry has been the source of
controversy. Although the use of amalgam is considered
safe, there are the perceived adverse effects on the environment by mercury and amalgam waste resulting as
amalgam is removed from the teeth. Chapter 4 presents
a more complete discussion of the issue, and Chapters
16 through 19 present the current indications for amalgam restorations.
I ndications for Direct Composite and OtherToothColored Restorations. The direct application of com-

posite is indicated for the treatment of many lesions or
faults in both anterior and posterior teeth. Detailed indications for composite and other tooth-colored restorations are presented in Chapters 11 through 15. The use
of composite as a restorative material for posterior teeth
has increased significantly. The American Dental Association has both supported the use of composite for
many Class I and Class 11 restorations and indicated that
such restorations should have a clinical longevity similar to amalgam restorations. Thus, direct composite restorations are appropriately indicated for most clinical
applications, anteriorly and posteriorly.

CHAPTER 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

I ndications for IndirectTooth-Colored Restorations.
Tooth-colored restorations that are indirectly fabricated
out of the mouth may be indicated for Classes I and II
due to esthetics, strength, and other bonding benefits
(see Chapter 14). Moreover, because of the potential of
bonded restorations to strengthen remaining tooth structure, indirect tooth-colored restorations also may be selected for the conservative restoration of weakened posterior teeth in esthetically critical areas.
Indirect tooth-colored restorations include: (1) processed composite, (2) feldspathic porcelain, (3) cast ceramic, and (4) computer-generated (computer-aided
design [CAD] /computer-assisted machining [CAM])
inlays and onlays. Although all types offer superior
physical characteristics when compared to direct composite restorations, they also are more costly because of
the indirect process required for fabrication or the expense of CAD/CAM equipment.
Although processed composite restorations possess improved wear resistance over direct composites, they are
indicated primarily for conservative Class I and Class II
preparations in low-to-moderate stress areas. Feldspathic
porcelain inlays and onlays for Class I and II restorations
are highly esthetic but suffer from a relatively high incidence of fracture, especially if subjected to heavy occlusal forces. Porcelain restorations also have the potential to wear opposing tooth structure.
Cast ceramic inlays and onlays for Class I and Class II
preparations offer excellent marginal fit, low abrasion
to opposing tooth structure, and superior strength compared to processed composite or feldspathic porcelain.
They offer an excellent esthetic alternative to cast metal
restorations.
Computer-generated ceramic restorations for Class I and
Class Il preparations possess high strength and low
abrasiveness and are highly esthetic because of the intrinsic coloration and highly polishable nature of the
material. Onlays and inlays can be generated with this
system. Because these restorations are fabricated chairside (CEREC System), only one appointment is required
for placement as compared to the two appointments required for the other types of indirectly fabricated toothcolored restorations.
I ndications for Cast Metal Restorations. Although
indications for intracoronal castings are few, a gold onlay that caps all of the cusps and includes some of the
axial tooth line angles (see Chapter 20) is an excellent
restoration. Cast metal restorations may be the treatment of choice for patients undergoing occlusal rehabilitation. Also, teeth with deep subgingival margins are
well treated with cast restorations because, compared to
amalgam and composite restorations, they provide a
better opportunity for control of proximal contours and
for restoration of the difficult subgingival margin. Specific indications for cast metal restorations are presented
in Chapter 20.

TREATMENT PLAN APPROVAL
As noted earlier in this chapter, informed consent has
become an integral part of modern day dental practice.
One aspect of informed consent is to provide the patient
with the necessary information about the alternative
therapies available to manage their oral conditions. For
nearly all conditions, there is usually more than one alternative. These alternatives need to be presented to the
patient and the advantages and disadvantages of each
discussed. In addition, the patient needs to be informed
of the risks associated with each alternative therapy.
Many times a reasonable alternative is not to intervene
but instead monitor the condition. Finally, the cost of
treatment alternatives needs to be discussed with the
patient. Once the dentist is sure that the patient has a
full and complete understanding of the alternative treatments, their associated risks and benefits, and the results
of possible nontreatment, then treatment can proceed.
SUMMARY
Proper diagnosis and treatment planning play a critical role in the quality of dental care. Each patient must
be evaluated individually in a thorough and systematic fashion. After the patient's condition is understood and recorded, a treatment plan can be developed
and rendered.
A successful treatment plan carefully integrates and
sequences all necessary procedures indicated for the patient. There are few absolutes in treatment planning; the
available information must be considered carefully and
incorporated into a plan to fit the needs of the individual. Patients should have an active role in the process;
they should be made aware of the findings, be advised
of the risks and benefits of the proposed treatment, and
be given the opportunity to help decide the course of
treatment.
Examination, diagnosis, and treatment planning are
extremely challenging and rewarding for both the patient and the dentist if done thoroughly and properly
with the patient's best interest in mind.

REFERENCES
1. American Dental Association: The dental patient record: structure and function guidelines, Chicago, 1987, American Dental
Association.
2. American Dental Association Council on Access, Prevention
and Interpersonal Relations: Providing dental care in longterm dental care facilities: a resource manual, Chicago, 1997,
American Dental Association.
3. American Hospital Formulary Service: AHFS drug information. GK McEvoy, editor. Bethesda, 1999, Board of the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, Inc.
4. Anusavice K: Criteria for placement and replacement of dental restorations: an international consensus report, Int Dent J
38(3):193-194,1988.
5. Ashley PF et al: Occlusal caries diagnosis: an in vitro histological validation of the Electronic Caries Monitor (ECM) and
other methods, J Dent 26(2):83-88, 1998.

CHAPTER 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

6. Bader JD, Shugars DA: Variation, treatment outcomes, and
practice guidelines in dental practice, J Dent Educ 59(1):61-95,
1995.
7. Berg R, Morgenstern NE: Physiological changes in the elderly, Dental Clin North Am 41(4):651-668, 1997.
8. Berkey DB et al: The old-old dental patient: The challenge of
clinical decision-making, J Am Dent Assoc 127(3):321-332,
1996.
9. Brantley CF et al: Does the cycle of rerestoration lead to larger
restorations? JAm Dent Assoc 126(10):1407-1413, 1995.
10. Cassady KA, Whitley RJ: New therapeutic approaches to the
alphaherpesvirus infections, J Antimicrob Chemother 39(2):
119-128,1997.
11. Christensen GJ: Educating patients about dental procedures,
JAm Dent Assoc 126(3):371-372, 1995.
12. Christensen GJ: Educating patients: a new necessity, J Am
Dent Assoc 124( 8):86-87, 1993.
13. Ciprano TM, Santos JF: Clinical behavior of repaired amalgam restorations: a two-year study, J Prosthet Dent 73(1):8-11,
1995.
14. Cleveland J et al: Risk and prevention of hepatitis C virus infection: implications for dentistry, J Am Dent Assoc 130(5):
641-647,1999.
15. Collins D: What a dentist should know about the oral health
record, Northwest Dent 75(l):35-37,1996.
16. Crumpler DC et al: Bonding to re-surfaced posterior composites, Dent Mater 5(6):417-423, 1989.
17. Dajani AS et al: Prevention of bacterial endocarditis: recommendations by the American Heart Association, J Am Dent
Assoc 128(8):1142-1151,1997.
18. EC-Clearinghouse on Oral Problems Related to HIV Infection and WHO Collaborating Centre on Oral Manifestations
of the Human ImmunodeficiencyVirus: Classification and diagnostic criteria for oral lesions in HIV infection, J Oral Pathol
Med 22:289-291, 1993.
19. Ekstrand K et al: Light microscope study of the effect of probing occlusal surfaces, Caries Res 21(4):368-374, 1987.
20. Fasbinder DJ: Treatment planner's toolkit, Gen Dent 47(1):
35-39,1999.
21. Ferreira-Zandona AG et al: An in vitro comparison between
laser fluorescence and visual examination for detection of demineralization in occlusal pits and fissures, Caries Res 32(3):
210-218,1998.
22. Ficarra G et al: Kaposi s sarcoma of the oral cavity: a study of
134 patients with a review of the pathogenesis, epidemiology,
clinical aspects, and treatment, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
66(5):543-550,1988.
23. Fitch DR et al: Amalgam repair of cast gold crown margins: a
microleakage assessment, Gen Dent 30(4):328-333, 1982.
24. Galan D, Lynch E. Epidemiology of root caries, Gerodontology
10(2):59-71,1993.
25. Gillcrist JA: Hepatitis viruses A, B, C, D, E and G: implications for dental personnel, J Am Dent Assoc 130(4):509-520,
1999.
26. Glick M: New guidelines for prevention, detection, evaluation and treatment of high blood pressure, J Am Dent Assoc
129(11):1588-1594, 1998.
27. Greenspan D, Greenspan JS: HIV-related oral disease, Lancet
348(9029):729-733, 1996.
28. Greenspan D et al: Oral "hairy" leukoplakia in male homosexuals: evidence of association with both papillomavirus and
a herpes-group virus, Lancet 2(8407):831-834, 1984.
29. Grippo JO: Abfractions: a new classification of hard tissue lesions of teeth, J Esthet Dent 3(1):14-19, 1991.

30. Health Care Financing Agency. Personal health care expenditures, by type of expenditure and source of funds: selected
calendar years 1990-1997. Available online at http:llwww.
hcfa.gov.lstatslINHE-Projlproj19981tablesltable8b.htm. Accessed
Dec 1999.
31. Hintze H et al: Reliability of visual examination, fiber-optic
transillumination, and bite-wing radiography, and reproducibility of direct visual examination following tooth separation
for the identification of cavitated carious lesions in contacting
approximal surfaces, Caries Res 32(3):204-209,1998.
32. Hoofnagle JH: Type B hepatitis: virology, serology and clinical
course, Semin Liver Dis 1(1):7-14, 1981.
33. Katz RV: The clinical identification of root caries, Gerodontology 5(1):21-24, 1986.
34. Kaugers GE et al: Radiographically detected class I carious
lesions in clinically sound teeth, Gen Dent 268-270, May-June
1994.
35. Khocht A et al: Assessment of periodontal status with PSR
and traditional clinical periodontal examination, J Am Dent
Assoc 126:1658-1665, 1995.
36. Kidd EA et al: Diagnosis of secondary caries: a laboratory
study Br Dent) 176(4):135-139, 1994.
37. Kidd EAM et al: Marginal ditching and staining as a predictor
of secondary caries around amalgam restorations: a clinical
and microbiological study, J Dent Res 74(5):1206-1211, 1995.
38. Kidd EAM et al: Occlusal caries diagnosis: a changing challenge
for clinicians and epidemiologists, J Dent 21(6):323-331,1993.
39. Lamster IB et al: Epidemiology and diagnosis of HIV-associated periodontal diseases, Oral Dis 3:8141-8148, 1997.
40. Lussi A: Validity of diagnostic and treatment decisions of fissure caries, Caries Res 25(4):296-303, 1991.
41. Madison M, Wilcox LR: An evaluation of coronal microleakage
in endodontically-treated teeth. Part III: in vivo study, J Ended
14(9):455-458, 1998.
42. Matteson SR et al: The report of the panel to develop radiographic selection criteria for dental patients, Gen Dent 39(4):
264-270, 1991.
43. Merchant VA: Herpes viruses and other microorganisms of
concern in dentistry, Dent Clin North Am 35(2):283-298, 1991.
44. Mertz-Fairhurst EJ et al: Clinical performance of sealed composite restorations placed over caries compared with sealed
and unsealed amalgam restorations, J Am Dent Assoc 115(5):
689-694,1987.
45. Miller CS: Viral infections in the immunocompetent patient,
Dermatol Clin 14(2):225-241,1996.
46. Mjor IA: Frequency of secondary caries at various anatomical
locations, Oper Dent 10(3):88-92, 1985.
47. Nasi JH: Background to, and implementation of, the Periodontal Screening and Recording (PSR) procedure in the USA,
Inter Dent J44(5 suppl 1):585-588, 1994.
48. Newbrun E: Problems in caries diagnosis, Int Dent J 43(2):
133-142,1993.
49. Newwitter DS et al: Detection of root caries: sensitivity and
specificity of a modified explorer, Gerodontics 1(2):65-67,1985.
50. Patton LL, McKaig R: Rapid progression of bone loss in HIVassociated necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis, J Periodont 69(6):
710-716,1998.
51. Patton LL, van der Horst C: Oral infections and other manifestations of HIV disease, Infect Dis Clin North Am 13:879-900,
1999.
52. Penning C et al: Validity of probing for fissure caries diagnosis, Caries Res 26(6):445-449,1992.
53. Pitts NB, Rimmer PA: An in vivo comparison of radiographic and directly assessed clinical caries status of posterior

CHAPTER 9

Patient Assessment, Examination and Diagnosis, and Treatment Planning

approximal surfaces in primary and permanent teeth,

Caries

Res 26(2):146-152, 1992.
54.
55.
56.

Sackett DL et al: Evidence-based medicine: What it is and
what it isn't, Br Med J 312(7023):71-72, 1996.
Shugars DA, Bader JD: Practice parameters in dentistry:
where do we stand? JAm DentAssoc 126(8):1134-1143,1995.
Sfikas PM: Informed consent and the law, J Am Dent Assoc
129(11):1471-1473, 1998.

57.

Vissink A et al: Aging and saliva: a review of the literature,
Spec Care Dentist 16(3):95-103, 1996.

58.

Yassin CM: In vitro studies of the effect of a dental explorer
on the formation of an artificial carious lesion, J Dent Child
62(2):111-117,1995.

SUGGESTED READINGS
Gillchrist JA: Hepatitis viruses A, B, C, D, E and G: implications
for dental personnel, J Am Dent Assoc 130:509-520, 1999.
Glick, M: Dental management of patients with HIV, Chicago, 1994,
Quintessence.
Miller CS: Viral infections in the immunocompetent patient, Dermatol Clin 14:225-241,1996.

Richman DD, Whitley RJ, Hayden FG, editors: Clinical virology,
NewYork, 1997, Churchill Livingstone.
Samaranayake LP: Essential microbiology for dentistry, New York,
1996, Churchill Livingstone.
Slots J, Taubman MA, editors: Contemporary oral microbiology and
immunology, St Louis, 1992, Mosby.

I.

II.

III.

Preoperative patient and dental team
considerations, 431
A. Patient and operator positions, 431
1. Chair and patient positions, 431
2. Operating positions, 431
3. General considerations, 433
4. Operating stools, 433
B. Instrument exchange, 434
C. Magnification, 434
Pain control, 434
A. Local anesthesia, 434
1. Patient factors, 435
2. Benefits, 436
3. Administration, 436
4. Emergency procedures, 443
B. Analgesia (inhalation sedation), 443
C. Hypnosis, 444
I solation of the operating field, 444
A. Goals of isolation, 444
1. Moisture control, 444
2. Retraction and access, 445

I V.

3. Harm prevention, 445
4. Local anesthesia, 445
B. Rubber dam isolation, 445
1. Advantages, 445
2. Disadvantages, 446
3. Materials and instruments, 446
4. Hole size and position, 449
5. Placement, 452
6. Removal, 457
7. Alternative/additional methods and
factors, 458
C. Cotton roll isolation and cellulose wafers, 465
D. Other isolation techniques, 466
1. Throat shields, 466
2. High-volume evacuators and saliva
ejectors, 466
3. Retraction cord, 468
4. Mirror and evacuator tip retraction, 469
5. Mouth props, 469
6. Drugs, 469
Summary, 469

C H A PT E R

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

In this chapter the routine chair-side preoperative procedures (before actual tooth preparation) are addressed.
Primarily, these include patient and operator positions,
pain control, and isolation of the operating field. The
preliminary procedures of occlusal considerations and
infection control are discussed in Chapters 2 and 8,
respectively.
PREOPERATIVE PATIENT AND
DENTAL TEAM CONSIDERATIONS
In preparation for a clinical procedure it is important to
ensure that patient and operator positions are properly
selected, that instrument exchange between the dentist
and assistant are efficient, and that magnification is
used if needed.
PATIENT AND OPERATOR POSITIONS
An appreciation of efficient patient and operator positions is beneficial for the welfare of both persons. The
patient who is in a comfortable position is more relaxed,
has less muscular tension, and is more capable of cooperating with the dentist. By using proper operating positions and good posture, the operator experiences less
physical strain and fatigue and reduces the possibility
of developing musculoskeletal disorders.
The practice of dentistry is demanding and stressful.
Physical problems may arise if appropriate operating
positions are neglected. Most restorative dental procedures can be accomplished while seated. Positions that
create unnecessary curvature of the spine or slumping
of the shoulders should be avoided. When the back and
chest are held in an upright position with the shoulders
squared, proper breathing and circulation are promoted.
At times, circumstances prevent maintaining this position while operating, but it should be the basic body position. Proper balance and weight distribution on both
feet is essential when operating from a standing position. Generally, any uncomfortable or unnatural position that places undue strain on the body should be
used only rarely. The health and fitness of the dentist are
significant factors contributing to physical endurance
and productivity.
Chair and Patient Positions. Chair and patient positions are important considerations. Modern dental
chairs are designed to provide total body support in any
chair position. An available chair accessory is an adj ustable headrest cushion or an articulating headrest attached to the chair back. A contoured or lounge-type
chair provides complete patient support and comfort.
Chair design and adjustment permit maximal operator
access to the work area. The adjustment control switches
should be conveniently located. Some chairs are also
equipped with programmable operating positions. To
improve infection control, chairs with a foot switch for
patient positioning are recommended.

The patient should have direct access to the chair. The
chair height should be low, the backrest upright, and the
armrest adjusted to allow the patient to get into the chair.
After the patient is seated, the armrest is returned to its
normal position. The headrest cushion is positioned to
support the head and elevate the chin slightly away from
the chest. In this position neck muscle strain is minimal
and swallowing is facilitated. The chair is then adjusted
to place the patient in a reclining position.
The most common patient positions for operative
dentistry are almost supine or reclined 45 degrees
(Fig. 10-1). The choice of patient position varies with the
operator, the type of procedure, and the area of the
mouth involved in the operation. In the almost supine
position, the patient's head, knees, and feet are approxi mately the same level. The patient's head should not be
lower than the feet; the head should be positioned lower
than the feet only in an emergency, as when the patient
is in syncope. When the operation is completed, the
chair should be placed in the upright position so the patient can leave the chair easily and gracefully, preventing undue strain or loss of balance.
Operating Positions. Operating positions may be
described by the location of the operator or by the location of the operator's arms in relation to patient position. For a right-handed operator, there are essentially
three positions-right front, right, and right rear. These
are sometimes referred to as the 7-, 9-, and 11-o'clock
positions, respectively (Fig. 10-2, A). For the left-handed

FIG . 10-1

Common patient positions. A, Supine. B, Reclined 45
degrees. Both are recommended for sit-down dentistry. Use
depends on the arch being operated upon.

C H A P T E R 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

operator, the three positions are left front, left, and left
rear, or the 5-, 3-, and 1-o'clock positions, respectively. A
fourth position, direct rear or 12-o'clock position, has
application for certain areas of the mouth. All of the positions discussed may be used from the standing or
seated operating position, though to relieve stress on
the operator's legs and support the operator's back,
most dental treatment is delivered from a seated position. As a rule, the teeth being treated should be at the

same level as the operator's elbow. The operating positions described here are for the right-handed operator;
the left-handed operator should substitute left for right.
Right Front Position. This right front position facilitates examination and work on mandibular anterior
teeth (see Fig. 10-2, B), mandibular posterior teeth (especially on the right side), and maxillary anterior teeth.
It is often advantageous to have the patient's head rotated slightly toward the operator.

FIG . 10-2 Operating positions indicated by arm approach to the patient.
A, Diagrammatic operator positions; B, right front; C, right; D, right rear; and
E, direct rear.

C H A P T E R 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

Right Position. In the right position, the operator is
directly to the right of the patient (see Fig. 10-2, C). This
position is convenient for operating on the facial surfaces of the maxillary and mandibular right posterior
teeth and the occlusal surfaces of the mandibular right
posterior teeth.
Right Rear Position. The right rear position is the position of choice for most operations. Most areas of the
mouth are accessible and can be viewed directly or indirectly using a mouth mirror. The operator is behind
and slightly to the right of the patient. The left arm is
positioned around the patient's head (see Fig. 10-2, D).
When operating from this position, the lingual and incisal (occlusal) surfaces of the maxillary teeth are viewed
in the mouth mirror. Direct vision may be used on
mandibular teeth, particularly on the left side, but the
use of a mouth mirror is advocated for light reflection,
retraction, and visibility.
Direct Rear Position. The direct rear position has
somewhat limited application and is primarily used for
operating on the lingual surfaces of mandibular anterior
teeth. The operator is located directly behind the patient
and looks down over the patient's head (see Fig. 10-2, E).
General Considerations. Several general considerations regarding chair and patient positions are also important. The operator should not hesitate to rotate the
patient's head backward or forward or from side-to-side
to accommodate the demands of access and visibility of
the operating field. Minor rotation of the patient's head
is not uncomfortable to the patient and allows the operator to maintain his or her basic body position. As a rule,
when operating in the maxillary arch, the maxillary occlusal surfaces should be oriented approximately perpendicular to the floor. When operating in the mandibular arch, the mandibular occlusal surfaces should be
oriented approximately 45 degrees to the floor. Patients
are usually very cooperative in allowing the operator to
position the head where it is most advantageous to the
operator. Sacrificing good operating posture in most instances is unnecessary (Fig. 10-3).
The face of the operator should not come in close proxi mity to that of the patient. The ideal distance, similar to
that for reading a book, should be maintained. However,
small, detailed, or inaccessible tooth preparations may
require closer proximity for adequate visibility. Maintaining an appropriate working distance from the patient is important for the operator to master in the early
stages of learning. Another important aspect of proper
operating position is to minimize body contact with the
patient. A proper operator does not rest forearms on the
patient's shoulders or hands on the patient's face or forehead. The patient's chest should not be used as an instrument tray. Unnecessary contact is unpleasant to
many patients and should not be practiced.
From most positions the left hand should be free to
hold the mouth mirror to reflect light onto the operating

field to view the tooth preparation indirectly or to retract the cheek or tongue. In certain instances it is more
appropriate to retract the cheek with one or two fingers
of the left hand than to use a mouth mirror. However, it
is often possible to retract the cheek and reflect light
with the mouth mirror at the same time.
When operating for an extended period, the operator
will find a certain amount of rest and muscle relaxation
can be obtained by changing operating positions. Operating from a single position for an entire day, especially
if standing, produces unnecessary fatigue. Changing
positions, if only for a short time, reduces muscle strain
and lessens fatigue . 36
Operating Stools. A variety of operating stools are
available for the dentist and dental assistant. The design
of the stool is important. The stool should be on casters
for mobility. It should be sturdy and well balanced to
prevent tipping or gliding away from the dental chair.
The seat should be well padded with smooth cushion
edges and should be adjustable up and down. The backrest should be adjustable forward and backward as well
as up and down. The assistant's stool should have a foot
ring to permit proper leg position. Operator stools do
not have a footrest. Comfortable, well-designed stools
help reduce tension and fatigue.
Some of the advantages of a seated work position are
lost if the operator uses the stool improperly. The operator should not be balanced on the stool, using it as a
third leg of a tripod. The operator should sit back on the
cushion, using the entire seat and not just the front edge.
The upper body should be positioned so that the spinal
column is straight or bent slightly forward and supported by the back rest of the stool. Some operator and
assistant stools have backrests with curved extensions
that offer additional body support. The thighs should
be parallel to the floor, and the lower legs should be
perpendicular to the floor. If the seat is too high, its

FIG 10-3 Recommended seating positions for operator and
chairside assistant, with the height of the operating field approximately at elbow level of the operator.

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

front edge will cut off circulation to the user's legs. Feet
should be flat on the floor. Of course, this ideal position
cannot be maintained at all times, but it should be used
as much as possible.
The seated work position for the assistant is essentially the same as for the operator, except that the stool
is 4 to 6 inches higher for maximal visual access. It is important, therefore, that the stool for the assistant have an
adequate footrest so that a parallel thigh position can be
maintained with good foot support. When properly
seated, both the operator and assistant are capable of
providing dental service throughout the day without an
unnecessary decline in efficiency and productivity because of muscle tension and fatigue.

I NSTRUMENT EXCHANGE
All instrument exchange between the operator and assistant should occur in the exchange zone below the patient's chin and several inches above the patient's chest.
Instruments should not be exchanged over the patient's
face. During the procedure the operator should anticipate and inform the assistant of the next instrument required; this allows the instrument to be brought into the
exchange zone for a timely exchange. An experienced
assistant will anticipate the operator's instrument needs
before they are verbalized.
During proper instrument exchange it should not be
necessary for the operator to remove his or her eyes
from the operating field. The operator should rotate the
instrument handle forward to cue the assistant to exchange instruments. Any sharp instrument should be
exchanged with appropriate deliberation. The assistant
should take the instrument from the operator, rather
than the operator dropping it into the assistant's hand,
and vice versa. The exchange need not be forceful, nor
should it be conducted as if the instrument were a
feather. Each person should be sure that the other has a
firm grasp on the instrument before it is released. To
maximize operating efficiency, whether treating one
tooth or several, each instrument should be used completely before proceeding to the next instrument. This
will minimize the number of instrument exchanges necessary for each procedure.

MAGNIFICATION
Another key to the success of clinical operative dentistry is visual acuity. The operator must be able to see
clearly to attend to the details of each procedure. Normal accommodation of the operator's eyes is necessary
to maintain proper working distance. The aging process
causes a loss of accommodation. After the age of 40, operators may require magnifying lenses to compensate
for this loss. The use of magnification before loss of accommodation facilitates attention to detail, acclimates
the operator to magnifying lenses early, and does not
adversely affect vision. Magnifying lenses have a fixed
focal length that often requires the operator to maintain

FIG10-4 use of magnification with surgical telescopes.
a proper working distance, which ensures good posture. Several types of magnification devices are available, including bifocal eyeglasses, loupes, and surgical
telescopes (Fig. 10-4). The use of eyeglasses also provides some protection from eye injury.

PAIN CONTROL
Historically, the public has associated dental treatment
with pain. This is no longer valid, because techniques
for the elimination of pain, including atraumatic needle
injection, have been available for years and are essential
to a successful dental practice. Local anesthesia for operative dentistry must be profound, often to depths required for pulpal anesthesia. The following information, if understood and practiced, should eliminate pain
associated with dental procedures. For additional information the reader is referred to Malamed's Handbook of
Local Anesthesia. 22

LOCAL ANESTHESIA
Injection is used to achieve local anesthesia in restorative dentistry. The administration of local anesthesia to
all tissues in the operating site is recommended for most
patients to eliminate pain and reduce salivation associated with tooth preparation and restoration. To administer effective anesthesia the dentist must have a thorough knowledge of the patient's physical and emotional
status and an understanding of the effects of the drug to
be injected and the advantages and disadvantages of
adding vasoconstrictors.
A therapeutic dose of a drug is the smallest amount that
is effective when properly administered and does not
cause adverse reactions. An overdose of a drug is an excessive amount that results in an overly elevated local
accumulation or blood level of the drug, which causes
adverse reactions. The normal healthy patient can safely
receive as many as five to eight cartridges of anesthetic
per appointment. Each 1.8-ml cartridge contains anesthetic, either with or without a vasoconstrictor (e.g.,
lidocaine 2% [anesthetic] with epinephrine 1:100,000

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

Maximum Recommended Doses of 2% Lidocaine with Epinephrine 1:100,000
(Based on 36 mg per Cartridge)

From Malamed SF: Handbook of local anesthesia, ed 4, St Louis, 1997, Mosby.
"Absolute maximum of 300 mg.

Maximum Recommended Doses of Other Commonly Used Local Anesthetics

From Malamed SF: Handbook of local anesthesia, ed 4, St Louis, 1997, Mosby.

[vasoconstrictor], lidocaine 2% plain [no vasoconstrictor]). The number of permissible cartridges increases
as body weight increases. According to Malamed, the
maximum recommended dose (MRD) of 2% lidocaine
with epinephrine 1:100,000 is 4.4 mg/kg, or 2.0 mg/lb,
to an absolute maximum of 300 mg (Table 10-1). (The
maximum recommended dosages of other commonly
used local anesthetics are listed in Table 10-2.) Tables
10-1 and 10-2 allow the operator to calculate the maximum dose for a specific agent depending on the weight
of the patient. However, these dosages are averages,
and the dentist must be alert to adverse systemic effects
when injected dosages approach the recommended
limits.
Local anesthetics have different durations of action
for both pulpal and soft tissue anesthesia. Pulpal (deep)
anesthesia varies from 30 to 90 or more minutes. Soft tissue anesthesia varies from 1 to 9 hours depending on
the specific agent and whether a vasoconstrictor is included. Local anesthetics are selected based on the estimated length of the clinical procedure and the degree of
anesthesia required (Box 10-1). Two (or more) anesthetic
agents can be administered when needed. However, the
total dose of both anesthetics should not exceed the
lower of the two maximum doses for the individual
agents. Anesthetics are also available in amide and ester
types. Hypersensitivity and allergic reactions in affected
patients are much less frequent with the amide type of
local anesthetic . 22

Approximate Duration of Action of
Local Anesthetics"
SHORT DURATION (PULPAL ABOUT 30 MINUTES)
Lidocaine 2%
Prilocaine 4% (infiltration)
Mepivacaine 3%
I NTERMEDIATE DURATION (PULPAL 60 MINUTES)
Articaine 4% + epinephrine 1:100,000
Articaine 4% + epinephrine 1:200,000
Lidocaine 2% + epinephrine 1:50,000
Lidocaine 2% + epinephrine 1: 100,000
Mepivacaine 2% + levonordefrin 1:20,000
Prilocaine 4% (nerve block)
Prilocaine 4% + epinephrine 1:200,000
LONG DURATION (PULPAL 90 OR MORE MINUTES)
Bupivacaine 0.5% + epinephrine 1:200,000
Etidocaine 1.5% + epinephrine 1:200,000 (nerve block)
From Malamed SF: Handbook of local anesthesia, ed 4, St Louis, 1997,
Mosby.
*Note that these anesthetics are all from the amide category.
Patient Factors

Cardiovascular System. Before administering any
drug, the condition of the cardiovascular system (CVS)
(heart and blood vessels) must be assessed. At minimum, blood pressure, heart rate, and rhythm should be
evaluated and recorded for all patients. For example, a

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

patient with a systolic pressure greater than 200 and a
diastolic pressure greater than 115 should not receive invasive, elective dental treatment until the blood pressure is reduced . 22
Malamed 22 has suggested that any resting patient
with a pulse rate below 60 or above 110 be questioned
further. Athletes in good physical condition may have a
lower heart rate, but without this information, the lower
heart rate may indicate a heart block. Additionally, five
or more "missed beats" (premature ventricular contractions) per minute with no obvious cause is an indication
for medical consultation. Patients with valvular heart
disease or a predisposition to bacterial endocarditis
should have prophylactic antibiotics prescribed before
dental treatment; the American Heart Association defines the recommended regimen for these antibiotics. 12
Overdose of any vasoconstrictor causes a rise in blood
pressure, elevated heart rate, and possible dysrhythmias. These symptoms may also occur if retraction cord
treated with epinephrine is applied to abraded gingiva,
resulting in a rapid uptake of the drug into the circulatory system. With careful operative dentistry, gingiva
should be minimally abraded, even in subgingival tooth
preparations.
Central Nervous and Respiratory Systems. The central nervous system (CNS) is more easily affected by an
overdose of injected anesthetic drugs than the CVS.
Anesthetics do depress the CNS, but when administered
properly for local anesthesia, they cause very little or no
clinical evidence of depression. However, at minimum
to moderate overdose levels, depression is manifested in
excitation (e.g., talkativeness, apprehension, sweating,
elevated blood pressure and heart rate, elevated respiratory rate) or drowsiness. At moderate to high overdose
levels there could be tonic-clonic seizure activity, followed by generalized CNS depression, depressed blood
pressure, reduced heart rate (less than 60 beats/ second),
depressed respiratory rate, and respiratory arrest. With
lidocaine and procaine, the usual progression of excitatory signs and symptoms described previously may not
be seen, and the first clinical evidence of overdose may
be mild sedation or drowsiness .22
The respiratory system is not affected by properly administered therapeutic doses of anesthetic drug. However, the system may be depressed and arrested by CNS
depression due to overdose.
Allergy. Malamed22 states that documented, reproducible allergy is an absolute contraindication for administration of local anesthetic. When a patient reports
a history of "sensitivity" or "reaction" to an injected dental anesthetic, the dentist must believe the patient until
further investigation disproves the patient's claim. Anaphylactic shock from an allergic reaction can be immediate and life threatening. Fast or intramuscular injection
of anesthetic are both reasons for allergy-like reactions
reported by patients. Some patients have a bona fide al-

lergy to bisulfite, an antioxidant used in anesthetic cartridges as a preservative for the vasoconstrictor. 22
Any special condition of the patient should be recorded in the chart. For example, health status of the
CVS, CNS, respiratory system, liver, kidneys, and thyroid gland should be noted, as should the patient's
age, allergies, and pregnancy status. A medical history
form must be completed and signed by the patient (see
Chapter 9).
Benefits
Cooperative Patient.

When a local anesthetic appropriate for the procedure is properly administered, patient anxiety and tension should be minimal. The appreciation and trust of the patient for the dentist (and dental
assistant) is expressed in a more relaxed and cooperative
attitude. Physically and emotionally, both patient and
dentist benefit from a relatively calm environment.
Salivation Control. Saliva control is a primary reason
for desiring profound anesthesia for most patients. For
years, it has been observed that complete anesthesia of
all tissues (teeth and gingival tissues) in the dental operating site results in a near cessation of salivation . 39
Sometimes a tooth is not sensitive and does not require
anesthesia. However, if all other sensations from the operating site are eliminated, salivation is controlled.
Hemostasis. The term hemostasis, as used in operative dentistry, is the temporary reduction in blood flow
and volume in tissue (ischemia) where a vasoconstrictor
is used. The alpha effect of the vasoconstrictor causes
constriction of the small blood vessels; thus the affected
tissue bleeds less if cut or abraded. The principle function of a vasoconstrictor in operative dentistry is the prolongation of anesthesia because of reduced blood flow
to and from the anesthetized site. Without epinephrine,
anesthesia from 1 ml of lidocaine 2% will last only 5 to
10 minutes; with epinephrine, the anesthesia will last
40 to 60 minutes. Reduced blood flow helps keep the patient's blood level of anesthetic and vasoconstrictor at a
low level by reducing the rate of absorption into the circulatory system.
Operator Efficiency. Local anesthesia greatly benefits
both dentist and patient and is very beneficial for successful tooth preparation and restoration. It improves
operator efficiency, and usually the patient is calmer
and more cooperative. This may reinforce the dentist's
confidence and calmness, which, in turn, may promote
more efficient treatment. Without distractions or management problems from the patient, the dentist can focus on the treatment and its completion in a reasonable
time frame.
Administration

Psychology. Patients have varying degrees of concern about receiving an intraoral injection. A concentrated effort by the dentist and dental assistant is required to make the procedure more acceptable, and a
positive approach is desirable with all patients during

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

this phase of treatment. Probably the greatest positive
effect is achieved by a caring manner, rather than by
what is said. Words such as pain, sting, hurt, and inject
should not be used, because no matter what else is said,
the patient will only remember these potentially fearinvoking words. The operator must use a kind, considerate, and understanding approach. Every assurance
should be made that comfort of the patient is paramount and that the teeth and soft tissues will be treated
with care. Such assurances, confidently and softly spoken, are welcomed during the administration of local
anesthesia. One example is, "I may be taking longer than
you expected, but we are giving the solution slowly to
be kind to your tissues." Patients who feel secure (safe
from pain and in caring hands) will gratefully accept local anesthesia. The art of tactfully keeping the syringe
and needle from view of the patient should be practiced.
Here the chairside assistant can be a tremendous help.
Technique Steps and Principles. Since profound,
painless anesthesia of both the teeth and contiguous soft
tissues is so important in operative dentistry, salient features of a recommended technique for infiltration anesthesia of a maxillary canine are presented. Technique
instructions for both injection and infection control (particularly avoiding accidental needlestick) are described,
and the following principles for injection of local anesthetic and epinephrine are applicable for infiltration and
conduction anesthesia. Infiltration anesthesia involves a
supraperiosteal or field block where deposition is near
the nerve ends in the operating site. Conduction anesthesia involves a nerve block where deposition is near a
nerve trunk at a distance from the operating site.
In this example of infiltration anesthesia, the needle
entry spot and direction are different from that presented in some local anesthesia textbooks. Aspiration as
well as slow deposition of solution is emphasized. For
other local anesthesia injections (inferior alveolar, GowGates mandibular, posterior superior alveolar, infraorbital, mental, and periodontal ligament), the reader is
referred to a textbook in local anesthesia.
The routine supine position of the patient helps prevent vasodepressor syncope because it maintains blood
supply and blood pressure to the brain. As a precaution,
the upper torso should never be more than 10 degrees
below the horizontal plane, as this may cause respiratory distress due to the force of viscera against the diaphragm. Occasionally, patients may complain of difficulty in breathing except when sitting upright or
standing (orthopnea), in which case a compromise in patient position is necessary. Another exception to the
supine position is when symptoms suggest an epinephrine overdose; in this case, a semierect or sitting position
is best since it minimizes any further elevation in cerebral blood pressure. Symptoms of overdose include fear,
perspiration, weakness, pallor, palpitations, anxiety, and
restlessness. 22

The syringe must have an aspirating feature. When
anesthetic is administered, aspiration is second in importance only to slow deposition of solution. For this
purpose, the rod (piston) has a harpoon on its cartridge
end and a thumb ring on the other end (see Fig. 10-5, H).
The harpoon engages the cartridge plunger, resulting in
its potential reverse movement to create negative pressure when the operator's thumb (in the ring) pulls back
gently.
Injection into infected tissue should be avoided because of the risk of spreading the infection. Also, the
anesthetic becomes less effective because the tissue is
acidic rather than basic. Alternative approaches, such as
nerve block, should be used.
Disposable needle. The sheath covers the needle and
the cap covers the reverse end (cartridge end) of the disposable needle (see s and c in Fig. 10-5, B). For each patient (appointment) the dental assistant selects a sheathed,
capped, new disposable needle of the desired length
and gauge. The sheathed needle comes sterile from the
manufacturer. The needle remains sheathed, except for
setting the harpoon and testing the syringe preparedness (see later principles), until the moment of entry at
the injection site. This helps prevent accidental needlestick, which among other things indicates needle replacement. For each patient appointment, using a new,
sterile needle contaminated only by that patient's oral
tissue eliminates crossinfection via the needle. Keeping
the sheath in place ensures that the needle is sharp.
When the needle contacts the firm periosteal tissue or
bone, a minute barb can be formed that will cause pain
on withdrawal or during subsequent reinjection.
The needle must be sufficiently long that its full
length is never out of sight (never completely within tissue). This means that in the unlikely event a needle
breaks at the hub junction there will be some of the needle exposed for grasping and withdrawal.
Needles of 27-gauge are generally recommended, although some operators prefer the 30-gauge, short needle for infiltration anesthesia of the maxillary teeth. The
30-gauge needle may not allow aspiration, and some
authorities believe that it does not pierce or move in tissue easier than the 27-gauge needle. Also, the 30-gauge,
long needle may deviate during injection for conduction
anesthesia of the inferior alveolar nerve.
Prop/guard card. The dental assistant inserts the
sheathed needle end into the prop/guard card (StikShield, Tacoma, Washington) (see Fig. 10-5, A to D) and
removes the cap on the reverse end of the needle (see
Fig. 10-5, E). The dental assistant then inserts the reverse
end of the needle into the hole at the threaded end of the
syringe and screws the sheathed needle to a full seating
position against the nose of the syringe (see Fig. 10-5, F
and G). The guard card protects both hands. The card
will hit the nose of the syringe before the needle could
stick the hand holding the syringe.

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

The dental assistant inserts the cartridge and sets the
harpoon or lays the propped (by card) syringe on a tray
or countertop (see Fig. 10-5, H) behind the patient for
the operator to insert the cartridge, set the harpoon, remove the sheath, and test for preparedness.
Anesthetic cartridge. Using a new cartridge for each
patient is imperative. Because some ingredients do not
have an extended shelf life, the anesthetic cartridge
should not be over 18 months past the date of manufacture. The expiration date is printed on the packing container. Some manufacturers place an expiration date on
the cartridge. The diaphragm end of the cartridge should
not be contaminated by contact with potentially infected
surfaces. The cartridge should not be immersed in a sterilizing solution (cold sterilizing solution or alcohol) because this can diffuse through the diaphragm and cause
tissue damage. Cartridges should not be exposed to sunlight and should be stored at room temperature.
Anesthetic solution. The weakest solution of anesthetic that will be effective should be used. Lidocaine
2% with 1:100,000 epinephrine is commonly used in
operative dentistry and is generally recommended. One
milliliter (half a cartridge) provides infiltration anesthesia for 40 to 60 minutes for anterior teeth.
The addition of a vasoconstrictor to the anesthetic solution is necessary to prolong anesthesia by decreasing the
rate of absorption of the anesthetic into the blood. Moreover, the vasoconstrictor may reduce the potential of anesthetic toxicity. As previously described, the vasoconstrictor in the anesthetic solution administered by infiltration
is useful in reducing occasional hemorrhage by producing slight, transient ischemia of cut or abraded soft tissue.
Before its use, the anesthetic solution should be
warmed to approximately body temperature. Otherwise,
the relatively cold solution will contribute to the pain of
injection. There is approximately a 30° difference between
room temperature and body temperature. The anesthetic
cartridge can be warmed in an anesthetic warmer, usually
heated by a low-watt light bulb, or the cartridge can be
held tightly in the palm of the hand for 10 to 15 seconds.
Anesthetic syringe. The anesthetic syringe includes a
rod (or piston) that has a harpoon (or barb) on the cartridge end and a thumb ring on the other end. The harpoon and thumb ring are features that allow the operator to aspirate during the injection. The harpoon engages
the cartridge plunger. During injection, and using the
thumb ring, the operator should periodically reverse the
movement of the rod to create negative pressure causing
aspiration. Periodic aspiration during injection is important to ensure that the solution is not being injected into
a blood vessel. If the tip of the needle is in the vessel,
blood will be aspirated into the cartridge, thus indicating
the need to reposition the needle. For patient safety and
comfort, periodic aspiration is as important as slow deposition of the anesthetic solution.

f I g . 10-5

A, Prop/guard (Stik-Shield) card. The periphery of the
hole (h) is indexed (i) (four pairs of short cuts) to accept four external ridges (r) of the sheath (s) shown in B. B, Sheath (s) covers the injection portion of the needle, and the cap (c) covers
the reverse end (cartridge needle). Sheath and cap are joined
by spot plastic weld (w). Note external ridge (r). C, With fingers
of one hand holding prop/guard card printed-side up (as well
as supporting it), the dental assistant (DA) uses the ends of the
thumb, index, and middle fingers of other hand to press the
l ast one third of the sheath through the hole while lining up external ridges to coincide with card indices. (Do not at this time
jar cap [on reverse end] loose with hand.) D, Dental assistant
applies thumb pressure (arrow) on the end of the cap to fully
i nsert sheath to its collar. (Do not at this time loosen cap by any
twisting motion.) E, Dental assistant's left hand holds sheath
( card on sheath) and presses down on countertop in a stationary position (left arrow) while fingers of right hand "twistbreak" plastic weld at cap/sheath union and then deliberately
move the cap off of the reverse-end needle. Note horizontal
right arrow depicting movement of hand (away from needle),
which discards the cap. F Dental assistant's left hand, still holdi ng carded sheathed needle, now inserts the reverse-end needle into the hole in the threaded end of the syringe held by
other hand (kept at last 3 inches away from card), and, G, then
screws the sheathed needle clockwise onto syringe threads to
a full-seating position against syringe nose. Note protection of
both hands by guard card during such threading. Harpoon (h)
i s utilized later. H, Dental assistant lays prepared syringe (minus anesthetic cartridge) on the countertop or tray behind the
patient, propped up because of the guard card and ready for
the operator. Note harpoon (h) on piston end.

Assembly of the syringe. To assemble the syringe
the assistant or operator picks up the syringe, and while
holding the piston fully retracted, inserts the cartridge
(see Fig. 10-5, I and J). The cartridge needle should be
diaphragm-centered. If it is not, the assistant or operator
guides the axial alignment of the cartridge so that the
needle pierces the center of the diaphragm as the springloaded, retracted piston is slowly released. If the cartridge needle is malpositioned or bent as the cartridge is
loaded, leaking can occur as the injection is initiated.
The distasteful solution may drip freely into the patient's
mouth. If so, the injection must be aborted, and another
cartridge must be placed properly in the syringe.
The harpoon is set into the cartridge plunger by a
light, quick thrust from the palm of the hand on the
thumb ring (see Fig. 10-5, N). Too strong a blow may
crack or break the cartridge.
The sheath should be removed out of the patient's
view, carefully moving it away from the needle and
syringe-holding hand, which is stationary on the tray or
countertop (see Fig. 10-5, K and L). The prop/guard
card protects the hand during sheath removal (see
Fig. 10-5, L). It also props the sheath, preventing
contamination (Fig. 10-5, M).

C H A P T E R 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

FIG 10-5 For legend, see opposite page.
Continued

C H A P T E R 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

FIG 10-5, cont'd For legend, see opposite page.

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

I and J, While fully retracting the springl oaded, moveable, rear cartridge seat of syringe by hand retraction of piston, the operator or assistant (behind the patient), inserts the cartridge, rearward end first (I) and then
"drops" the forward end (diaphragm end) of the cartridge into
position (J) without dragging across or bending the reverseend needle. Then the operator or assistant slowly releases piston retraction, moving the rear cartridge seat and cartridge forward, allowing the reverse-end needle to pierce diaphragm.
( Leakage of cartridge during later attempted deposition is usually caused by a bent, reverse-end needle poorly centered on
the diaphragm.) K and L., With the syringe propped by the card
on countertop (or tray) behind the patient, the operator or assistant holds the sheath by the fingers of one hand (card protected) and the syringe by the other hand, which is kept stationary (K) as sheath is loosened and removed away from
needle (L). M, Guard card now props sheath. N, Operator or
assistant sets the harpoon by gentle palm-thump of thumb
ring, and then (O) tests the syringe for preparedness by thumb
pressure moving plunger forward 1 to 2 mm while verifying
emission of solution (s) from needle without leakage at the
forward end of the syringe body.
f I G . 10-5, cont'd

The assembled syringe is tested by pressing the
plunger forward 1 to 2 mm to verify that it slides easily
and ensure that the solution is emitted from the needle
tip without leakage (see Fig. 10-5, O).
If preparation of the injection site has previously been
accomplished by gauze-wiping of the entry site and the
1- to 2-minute placement of topical anesthetic (see the
next principles), the injection procedure follows.
Topical anesthetic. Before needle entry, the mucosa
at the injection site should be wiped free of debris and
saliva by a sterile gauze. After wiping, apply a lidocaine
topical anesthetic ointment for a minimum of 1 to 2 minutes to the proposed entry spot (using a cotton-tipped
swab, limiting the area of application to the swab dimension). This procedure is often started immediately
after positioning the patient in the chair and following
the gauze wiping. The chairside assistant may perform
the gauze wipe and application of topical anesthetic.
The use of topical anesthetic is generally recommended. However, good injection technique including
a slow deposition rate (approximately 60 seconds per
cartridge), a warmed cartridge, and the use of sharp
needles are more important factors in a painless injection than the use of topical anesthetic.
Injection site. If in place, remove the needle sheath
in a one-person procedure with the hand protected by
the shield (see Fig. 10-5, K and L). With the left hand
(right-handed operator) gently raise the lip outward and
upward to identify the vestibular fornix, or mucogingival junction, where the attached gingiva joins the alveolar mucosa (Fig. 10-6). Holding the lip high enough, vi-

Lip position yl and needle direction yn recommended
f I G . 10-6Recommended

entry spot (e), direction of needle
(yn), and lip position (yU for infiltration anesthesia of maxillary
canine. Direction of needle xn and lip position xl are not recommended. Vestibular fornix of is the junction of the loose
and fixed mucosa.

sualize the location of the root end and predict the injection site in the alveolar mucosa: (1) as it is stretched
perpendicular, or nearly so, to the long axis of the tooth,
and (2) toward the periosteal target area, which is very
near the root end of the tooth to be operated on (see
Fig. 10-6). The injection site should be 5 to 10 mm lateral
of the mucogingival line, thereby allowing some freedom of needle movement without causing tissue tension. If the needle is held parallel to the tooth long axis,
rather than at an angle as recommended, the tendency
is to enter too close to the attached mucosa. This results
in the needle being inserted too close to the very sensitive periosteal lining, inviting pain from touching or
stripping the periosteum from the bone. The needle tip
should not be close to the periosteum until it has
reached its target area.
Injection. Knowing the injection site and with the
needle directed properly, do two things simultaneously
in preparation for the injection: (1) apply a slight, gentle
tug to the lip (outward and upward) to have the entry
spot tissue slightly taut, and (2) insert the needle about
3 mm into the mucosa (all the bevel under the epithelium). The slight, gentle tug while tensing the tissue,
coupled with topical anesthesia, masks any sensation
from the needle entry. After this, the lip may be relaxed
somewhat, maintaining visibility of the needle. Initially,
deposit a small amount of solution slowly while observing and reassuring the patient. Then wait several seconds for the anesthetic to take effect near the injection
site before continuing the injection.
Still maintaining proper needle direction, gently continue inserting the needle toward the periosteum target.
Be careful to sense resistance when the needle tip touches

CHAPTER I0

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

the lining of the bone, at which time the needle is immediately withdrawn 1 to 2 mm.
Aspirate by slightly reversing the harpooned plunger
a few millimeters by gentle backward movement of the
thumb ring. Aspiration (negative pressure) verifies that
the needle is not in a blood vessel. If blood appears in
the cartridge, the aspiration is positive; immediately
withdraw the needle 1 to 2 mm and aspirate again until
blood does not appear.
If aspiration is negative, slowly deposit 1 ml (slightly
more than half the cartridge) over the next 30 seconds,
while continually observing and reassuring the patient.
A rate of deposition of a minute for 1 ml is a good rule
of thumb. Slow deposition is the most important safety
procedure for the prevention of adverse reactions because of high blood levels of anesthetic or epinephrine.
Aspiration is second in importance. Malamed 22 defines
overly rapid deposition as taking less than 30 seconds
for 1.8 ml (one cartridge). This fast rate separates tissue
and is too rapid to allow diffusion along normal tissue
planes. If the injection is intravascular, it can lead to se-

rious adverse reactions. Also, it is painful or at least
uncomfortable. Malamed states that a 1-minute rate for
1.8 ml of anesthetic (30 seconds for 1 ml, or half a cartridge) will not cause tissue damage and will not lead to
serious overdose reactions, even if accidentally injected
intravascularly 22
An important principle is to deposit the smallest volume that will provide effective anesthesia. One of the
more common errors is to deposit so much anesthetic
( with epinephrine) that overdose reactions may occur.
After deposition, gently withdraw the needle and
resheath it. A one-handed procedure is recommended.
Insert the needle partially into the propped sheath (remaining after the unsheathing procedure), upright the
sheath on the tray or countertop, and seat the needle
fully into the sheath (Fig. 10-7, A and B). The sheathed
syringe is left propped for possible reuse or for later
removal and disposal (see Fig. 10-7, C). Resheathing is
extremely important in the prevention of a needlestick,
which can cause cross-infection to the operator and other
office personnel. The federal Occupational Safety and

FIG 10-7 A, Behind the patient, the operator (or person who gave injection),
using only the syringe-holding hand, inserts the needle partially into the sheath
propped by prop/guard card, and then,
B, uprights syringe and sheath upon the
tray or countertop and presses the needle fully into sheath. C, Operator lays
resheathed syringe propped by card on
countertop.

CHAPTER 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

Health Administration (OSHA) stipulates that needle
resheathing should be a one-handed procedure. It is
also recommended that resheathing should be done by
the same person who gave the injection; this eliminates
the hazard of passing exposed needles.
Even though multiple injections using the same needle for a patient creates no infection control concerns,
multiple uses are discouraged because the used needle
and its lumen contents may be infectious to dental personnel if accidental needlestick occurs.
It is important that the patient be continually observed during and after the administration of local anesthesia. Never leave an anesthetized patient unattended
and unobserved. Adverse reactions, if they occur, demand immediate attention by the dentist.
Disposal of the needle and cartridge. Proper disposal of the needle and cartridge is critical. Removal
and disposal of the sheathed, used needle is done by the
dental assistant, whose shield-protected hand carefully
unscrews the sheathed needle from the syringe (see
Fig. 10-7, D), and moves it away from the syringe
(see Fig. 10-7, E). Avoid any tissue contact with the uncapped, exposed cartridge needle. If the needle hub is
too tight to remove with controlled finger pressure
alone, use a suture-needle holder (or similar instrument) to loosen the needle hub. Never manually recap
the reverse end of the used needle. The assistant's hands
should be gloved, preferably with utility gloves.
Disposal of the sheathed, used needle immediately
follows its removal from the syringe. With the protective
guard card still in place, convey it to a nearby sharps
disposal container, laying the attached card on the orifice rim (see Fig. 10-7, F). Then, with thumb pressing on
the plastic, push the sheathed needle out of the card into
the container (see Fig. 10-7, G). The cartridge should

also be disposed of in the sharps container. The sharps
container must be leakproof, hard-walled, and display
an OSHA biohazard label."
Emergency Procedures. The importance of taking
pretreatment vital signs cannot be overemphasized. The
patient's pretreatment blood pressure and pulse rate
should be recorded in the chart. These vital signs are
useful to uncover previously unknown cardiovascular
problems and to serve as a baseline if an adverse reaction occurs during treatment. Adverse reactions occurring during or following administration of local anesthesia can lead to serious complications that require
emergency procedures; foremost among these procedures are: (1) place the patient in a supine position (note
the following exception), (2) summon medical assistance, (3) monitor vital signs, and (4) apply basic life
support (open the airway, and use cardiopulmonary resuscitation [CPR] if needed). The supine position, with
legs (only) slightly elevated increases the volume of circulating blood and aids in raising blood pressure. This
procedure for the patient in syncope, or with syncopal
symptoms, should relieve hypoxia of the brain and return him or her to or help maintain consciousness. However, the supine position should not be used when
symptoms (e.g., fear, perspiration, weakness, pallor, palpitations) suggest an epinephrine overdose. In this case,
a semierect or sitting position is best because it minimizes any further elevation in cerebral blood pressure . 22

ANALGESIA (INHALATION SEDATION)
The most appropriate method of preventing pain is by
blocking the nerve pathways capable of conducting
nerve impulses. However, for those patients who have
a low threshold of pain and are apprehensive (hyperresponders), raising the threshold by inhalation sedation

D through G, Dental assistant, after patient dismissal, holds the syringe stationary with the fingers of one hand at least 2 inches away from guard card as the fingers of the
stronger hand unscrew (counterclockwise) the sheathed, used needle from the syringe (D) and
( E) immediately move it (with reverse-end needle exposed) away from the syringe (distance
from card to end of reverse-end needle is only 1 inch, and card will stop needle from sticking
syringe-holding fingers, which are 2 inches or more away).
Continued
FIG .10-7, cont'd

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

FIG 10-7, cont'd

Then (F) the dental assistant continues to hold the sheathed needle and conveys it to a nearby (within a few feet) leakproof, hard-walled, OSHA biohazard-labeled container
with a suitable size orifice, gently laying (on the rim) the guard card with the reverse-end needle
down, and (G) steadies the card with fingers of one hand and presses (with the thumb of the other
hand) the sheathed needle out of the card to free-fall into the container. The container should be
kept upright, tightly closed between disposals of sharps, and out of the reach of children.

is an aid to be coupled with anesthesia by injection. The
use of nitrous oxide and oxygen is one method of inhalation sedation.
For this, the reader is referred to a textbook on anesthesia that covers inhalation sedation in detail. The operator should understand that this method of pain control has definite limitations. Analgesia should not be
thought of as general anesthesia in any stage or depth.
It is simply a condition in which the pain threshold is elevated. With inhalation sedation the patient is conscious
of surrounding activities.
HYPNOSIS
The fear of pain associated with dental procedures can
sometimes be controlled by hypnosis. A favorable mental attitude may be established through suggestions of
relaxation. Through hypnosis, the dentist and patient
may derive certain benefits. The dentist has the opportunity to work on a more relaxed and cooperative patient and has better control over patient habits such as
talking, rinsing, and oral tissue tension. The patient who
is relaxed is less fatigued at the end of the appointment
and has no specific recollection of having experienced
discomfort.
Hypnosis has merit under certain circumstances and
has produced satisfactory results for some practitioners
when properly applied. However, before hypnosis is attempted, the operator must know how to recognize and
cope with conditions associated with psychologic, emo-

tional, and mental factors and must be thoroughly familiar with all of the principles involved in hypnosis.
Hypnosis is not a way to eliminate all other accepted
means of minimizing dental pain or discomfort, but it
may well be a valuable adjunct in improving accepted
procedures .23 Also, posthypnotic suggestion has been
found to be successful in alleviating certain noxious
dental habits.
I SOLATION OF THE
OPERATING FIELD
The goals of operating field isolation are moisture control, retraction, and harm prevention. Local anesthesia is
also important in moisture control, as was previously
discussed.
GOALS OF ISOLATION
Moisture Control. Operative dentistry cannot be executed properly unless the moisture in the mouth is controlled. Moisture control refers to excluding sulcular
fluid, saliva, and gingival bleeding from the operating
field. It also refers to preventing the handpiece spray
and restorative debris from being swallowed or aspirated by the patient. The rubber dam, suction devices,
and absorbents are varyingly effective in moisture control. These techniques and others are discussed in detail
in this chapter. Generally, the rubber dam is the recommended technique for moisture control. However,
Raskin et al3 and Fusayama" have reported that achiev-

CHAPTER 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

ing effective isolation is more important than the specific technique utilized.
Retraction and Access. The details of a restorative
procedure cannot be managed without proper retraction and access. This provides maximal exposure of the
operating site and usually involves maintaining an open
mouth and depressing or retracting the gingival tissue,
tongue, lips, and cheek. The rubber dam, high-volume
evacuator, absorbents, retraction cord, and mouth prop
are used for retraction and access. (Each of these is discussed later in this chapter.)
Harm Prevention. An axiom taught to every member
of the health profession is, "Do no harm," and an important consideration of isolating the operating field is
preventing the patient from being harmed during the
operation. Excessive saliva and handpiece spray can
alarm the patient. Small instruments and restorative debris can be aspirated or swallowed. Soft tissue can be
damaged accidentally. As with moisture control and retraction, a rubber dam, suction devices, absorbents, and
occasional use of a mouth prop contribute not only to
harm prevention but also to patient comfort and operator efficiency. Harm prevention is provided as much by
the manner in which these devices are used as by the
devices themselves.
Local Anesthesia. Local anesthetics play a role in
eliminating the discomfort of dental treatment and controlling moisture. Use of these agents reduces salivation,
apparently because the patient is more comfortable, less
anxious, and less sensitive to oral stimuli, thus reducing
salivary flow. Local anesthetics incorporating a vasoconstrictor also reduce blood flow, thus helping to control hemorrhage at the operating site.
RUBBER DAM ISOLATION

In 1864, S.C. Barnum, a New York City dentist, introduced the rubber dam into dentistry. Use of the rubber
dam ensures appropriate dryness of the teeth and improves the quality of clinical restorative dentistry.
The rubber dam is used to define the operating field
by isolating one or more teeth from the oral environment. The dam eliminates saliva from the operating site
and retracts the soft tissue. When the rubber dam is used,
many procedures are facilitated because dryness is ensured during tooth preparation and restoration. Also,
there are fewer interruptions to replace cotton rolls to
maintain isolation. When excavating a deep carious lesion and risking pulpal exposure, use of the rubber dam
is strongly recommended to prevent pulpal contamination from oral fluids.
Advantages. In general, the rubber dam is the most
successful method of isolating the operating field. The
advantages of the rubber dam are significant and become obvious as the operator gains proficiency. The advantages of isolation of the operating field are: (1) a dry,
clean operating field, (2) improved access and visibility,

(3) potentially improved properties of dental materials,
(4) protection of the patient and operator, and (5) operating efficiency. For best results, operative procedures require adequate isolation of the operating field.
Dry, Clean Operating Field. For most procedures,
rubber dam isolation is the preferred method of obtaining a dry, clean, field. The operator can best perform
procedures such as caries removal, proper tooth preparation, and insertion of restorative materials in a dry
field. Teeth prepared and restored using rubber dam
isolation are less prone to postoperative problems related to contamination from oral fluids. The time saved
by operating in a clean field with good visibility may
more than compensate for the time spent applying the
rubber dam."
Access and Visibility. The rubber dam provides maxi mal access and visibility. It controls moisture and retracts the soft tissue. Gingival tissue is retracted mildly to
enhance access to and visibility of gingival aspects of the
tooth preparation. The dam also retracts the lips, cheeks,
and tongue. A black ("dark") rubber dam provides a
dark, nonreflective background in contrast to the operating site. Because the dam remains in place throughout
the operative procedure, access and visibility are maintained without interruption.
I mproved Properties of Dental Materials. The rubber dam prevents moisture contamination of restorative
materials during insertion and promotes improved
properties of dental materials. Amalgam restorative material does not achieve its maximal physical properties if
used in a wet field.' Bonding to enamel and dentin is
unpredictable if the tooth substrate is contaminated with
saliva, blood, or other oral fluids.
The dentist should
provide the highest quality restoration possible by utilizing an appropriate operating environment.
Protection of the Patient and Operator. The rubber
dam protects both patient and operator. It protects the
patient from aspirating or swallowing small instruments
or debris associated with operative procedures. Immediate recovery of these items is facilitated by the rubber
dam. A properly applied rubber dam protects the soft
tissue from irritating or distasteful medicaments (e.g.,
etching agents). The dam also offers some soft tissue
protection from rotating burs and stones.
Authors disagree on whether the rubber dam protects
the patient from mercury exposure during amalgam removal. However, there is agreement that the rubber
dam is generally an effective infection control barrier for
the dental office . 10,13,35
Operating Efficiency. Use of the rubber dam allows
for operating efficiency and increased productivity. Excessive patient conversation is discouraged. The rubber
dam retainer (discussed later) helps to provide a moderate amount of mouth opening during the procedure.
(For additional mouth-opening aids, see Mouth Props,
later in this chapter.) Quadrant restorative procedures

CHAPTER I0

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

are facilitated. Many state dental practice acts permit
the assistant to place the rubber darn, thereby saving the
dentist time. Each of the rubber dam's advantages permits a more efficient operative procedure. The rubber
dam can make things easier and more comfortable for
the patient and create conditions that facilitate dental
service of the highest possible quality. Smales concludes
that there is no difference between the use of the rubber
dam and cotton roll isolation; each relates to restoration
quality and survival . 37 However, Christensen reports
that use of a rubber dam increases both the quality and
quantity of restorative services.'
Disadvantages. Rubber dam usage is low among private practitioners. Time consumption and patient objection are the most frequently quoted disadvantages of
the rubber dam. However, these concerns are reduced
with the use of a simplified technique for application
and removal. Usually, the rubber dam can be placed in
3 to 5 minutes. This is also the approximate time necessary for onset of anesthesia. After the dam is applied,
most patients are more relaxed knowing that water
spray and debris from the procedure are isolated from
them. Jones and Reid have reported that use of the rubber dam was well accepted by patients and operators.
Certain oral conditions may preclude the use of the
rubber dam; these conditions include: (1) teeth that have
not erupted sufficiently to support a retainer, (2) some
third molars, and (3) extremely malpositioned teeth. In
addition, patients suffering from asthma may not tolerate the rubber dam if breathing through the nose is
difficult. Also, there are rare instances when the patient
cannot tolerate a rubber dam because of psychologic reasons or latex allergy34 However, latex-free rubber dam
material is currently available. Reports of patients disliking the rubber dam are usually the result of a lack of
confidence of the dental team with its application. 16
Materials and Instruments. The materials and instruments necessary for the use of the rubber dam are
available from most dental supply companies.

FIG. 10-8

Rubber dam material as supplied in sheets.

Material. Rubber dam material, as with all rubber
products, deteriorates over time, resulting in low tear
strength. Therefore material that is reasonably new
should be used. Dam material is available in 5 X 5 inch
(12.5 X 12.5 cm) or 6 X 6 inch (15 X 15 cm) sheets. Sterile dam material is also available packaged as individual sheets. The thicknesses or weights available are thin
(0.006 inch [0.15 mm]), medium (0.008 inch [0.2 mm]),
heavy (0.010 inch [0.25 mm]), extra heavy (0.012 inch
[0.30 mm]), and special heavy (0.014 inch [0.35 mm]).
Both light and dark dam material are available, but the
dark color is preferred for contrast. Green and blue colors are also marketed. (Fig. 10-8 illustrates rubber dam
material.) Rubber dam material has a shiny and a dull
side. Because the dull side is less light reflective, it is
generally placed facing the occlusal of the isolated teeth.
A thicker dam is more effective in retracting tissue and
more resistant to tearing; it is especially recommended
for isolating Class V lesions in conjunction with a cervical retainer. The thinner material has the advantage of
passing through the contacts easier, which is particularly helpful when contacts are tight. Generally, dark,
heavy, 6 X 6 inch sheets are recommended.
Holder. The rubber dam holder (frame) maintains the
borders of the rubber dam in position. The Young
holder is a U-shaped metal frame (Fig. 10-9) with small
metal projections for securing the borders of the rubber
dam. It is easily applied and comfortable for the patient.
An optional adjustable neck strap (Fig. 10-10) may be
placed behind the patient's neck and is attached to two
hooks, one in the middle of each side of the frame. The
neck strap is lightly tightened to snug the dam and
frame to the face to maximize retraction and provide access to the operating site.
Retainer. The rubber dam retainer (clamp) consists
of four prongs and two jaws connected by a bow (Fig.
10-11). The retainer is used to anchor the dam to the
most posterior tooth to be isolated. Retainers are also
used to retract gingival tissue. Many different sizes and

FIG, 10-9

The Young rubber dam frame (holder).

CHAPTER 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

shapes are available, with specific retainers designed for
certain teeth (Fig. 10-12). (Refer to Table 10-3 for suggested retainer applications.) Experience reduces the
number of retainers necessary for most practitioners.
When positioned on a tooth, a properly selected retainer
should contact the tooth in four areas-two on the facial
surface and two on the lingual surface (see Fig. 10-11).
This four-point contact prevents rocking or tilting of the
retainer. Movement of the retainer on the anchor tooth
can injure the gingiva and tooth, resulting in postoperative soreness or sensitivity. The prongs of some retainers
are gingivally directed (inverted) and are helpful when
the anchor tooth is only partially erupted or when additional soft tissue retraction is indicated (Fig. 10-13). The
jaws of the retainer should not extend beyond the mesial and distal line angles of the tooth because: (1) they may
interfere with matrix and wedge placement, (2) gingival
trauma is more likely to occur, and (3) a complete seal
around the anchor tooth is more difficult to achieve.
Wingless and winged retainers are available (see Fig.
10-12). The winged retainer has both anterior and lateral
wings (Fig. 10-14). The wings are designed to provide
extra retraction of the rubber dam from the operating
field and to allow attachment of the dam to the retainer
before conveying the retainer (with dam) to the anchor
tooth (see Fig. 10-29), after which the dam is removed
from the lateral wings. A disadvantage of the winged retainer is that wings often interfere with the placement of
matrix bands, band retainers, and wedges. Most opera-

FIG 10-12

10-10 Adjustable neck strap for use with the Young rubber dam frame.

FIG.

Tooth section at
l evel of prong tips
FIG 10-11 Rubber dam retainer. Note four-point prong contact
(arrows) with tooth.

Typical selection of rubber dam retainers. Note retainers with wings (w).

C H A P T E R 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

Suggested Retainers for Various Anchor
Tooth Applications

tors prefer the wingless retainer. As seen in Fig. 10-14,
the anterior wings can be cut away if they are not
wanted.
The bow of the retainer (except the No. 212, which is
applied after the rubber dam is in place) should be tied
with dental floss (Fig. 10-15) approximately 12 inches
(30.5 cm) in length before the retainer is placed in the
mouth. For maximal protection the tie may be threaded
through both holes in the jaws because the bow of the
retainer could break. The floss allows retrieval of the retainer or its broken parts if they are accidentally swallowed or aspirated.
It is sometimes necessary to recontour the jaws of the
retainer to the shape of the tooth by grinding with a
mounted stone (Fig. 10-16).
A retainer usually is not required when the dam is applied for treatment of the anterior teeth, except for the
cervical retainer for Class V restorations.
Punch. The rubber dam punch is a precision instrument having a rotating metal table (disk) with six holes
of varying sizes and a tapered, sharp-pointed plunger
(Fig. 10-17). Care should be exercised when changing
from one hole to another. The plunger should be centered in the cutting hole so the edges of the holes are not
f I G . 10-13 Retainers with prongs directed gingivally are help- at risk of being chipped by the plunger tip when the
ful when the anchor tooth is only partially erupted.
plunger is closed. Otherwise, the cutting quality of the
punch will be ruined, as evidenced by incompletely cut
holes. These holes tear easily when stretched during application over the retainer or tooth.
Retainer Forceps. The rubber dam retainer forceps is
used both for placement and removal of the retainer
from the tooth (Fig. 10-18).
Napkin. The rubber dam napkin, placed between the
rubber dam and the patient's skin, has the following
advantages:

f I G 10-14 Removing

anterior wings (a) on molar retainer. Lateral wings (b) are for holding lip of stretched rubber dam hole.

1. It prevents skin contact with rubber to reduce the
possibility of allergic reactions in sensitive patients.
2. It absorbs any saliva seeping at the corners of the
mouth.

FIG . 10-15 Methods of tying retainers with dental floss.

CHAPTER 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

3. It acts as a cushion.
4. It provides a convenient method of wiping the patient's lips on removal of the dam.
The rubber dam napkin adds to the comfort of the patient, particularly when the dam must be used for long
appointments. Most operators use commercially available napkins that are soft, absorbent, and disposable
(Fig. 10-19).
Lubricant. A water-soluble lubricant applied in the
area of the punched holes facilitates the passing of the
dam septa through the proximal contacts. A rubber dam
lubricant is commercially available, but other lubricants,
such as shaving cream or soap slurry, are also satisfactory. Applying the lubricant to both sides of the dam in
the area of the punched holes aids in passing the dam
through the contacts. Cocoa butter or petroleum jelly
may be applied at the corners of the patient's mouth to
prevent irritation. These two materials, however, are not
satisfactory rubber dam lubricants because both are oil
based and not easily rinsed from the dam once the dam
is placed.
Modeling Compound. Low-fusing modeling compound is sometimes used to secure the retainer to the
tooth to prevent retainer movement during the operative procedure. If used, the compound must not cover
the holes in the retainer in order to have ready access to
the retainer for rapid removal with forceps, if necessary.
Anchors (Other Than Retainers). Anchors other than
retainers may be used. The proximal contact may be sufficient to anchor the dam on the tooth farthest from the
posterior retainer (in the isolated field), thereby eliminating the need for a second retainer (see Placement of
the Rubber Dam, step 13). To further secure the dam anteriorly or to anchor the dam on any tooth where a retainer is contraindicated, waxed dental tape (or floss)
or a small piece of rubber dam material (cut from a sheet
of dam) may be passed through the proximal contact.
When dental tape is used, it should be passed through

FIG.10-16

Recontouring jaws of retainer with mounted stone.

the contact, looped, and passed through a second time
(Fig. 10-20, A). The cut piece of dam material is first
stretched, passed through the contact, and then released
(Fig. 10-20, B). Once the anchor is in place, the tape, floss,
or dam material should be trimmed to approximately
0.5 inch in total length to prevent interference with the
operating site.
Hole Size and Position. Successful isolation of the
teeth and maintenance of a dry, clean operating field
largely depend on hole size and position in the rubber
dam. 18 Holes should be punched by following the arch
form, making adjustments for malpositioned or missing
teeth. Most rubber dam punches have either five or six

FIG .10-17

FIG 10-18

Rubber dam punch.

Rubber dam retainer forceps engaging retainer.

FIG . 10-19

Disposable rubber dam napkin.

C H A PT E R

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

A
FIG 10-20

B
A, Anchor formed from dental tape. B, Anchor formed from rubber dam material.

Cutting table on rubber dam punch, illustrating use
of hole size.
FIG . 10-21

holes in the cutting table. Use the smaller holes for the
incisors, canines, and premolars and the larger holes for
the molars. The largest hole is generally reserved for the
posterior anchor tooth (Fig. 10-21). The following guidelines and suggestions are helpful when positioning the
holes:
(Optional) Punch an identification hole in the upper
left (that is, the patient's left) corner of the rubber
dam for ease of location of that corner when applying
the dam to the holder (see Fig. 10-23, A).
When operating on the incisors and mesial surfaces
of canines, isolate from first premolar to first premolar. Metal retainers usually are not required for this
isolation (Fig. 10-22, A). If additional access is necessary after isolating the teeth as described, a retainer
can be positioned over the dam to engage the adjacent nonisolated tooth, but care must be exercised not
to pinch the gingiva beneath the dam (see Fig. 10-22,
B and C). When operating on a canine, it is preferable
to isolate from the first molar to the opposite lateral
incisor. To treat a Class V lesion on a canine, isolate
posteriorly to include the first molar to provide access for the cervical retainer placement on the canine.
When operating on posterior teeth, it is beneficial to

isolate anteriorly to include the lateral incisor on the
opposite side of the arch from the operating site. In
this case the hole for the lateral incisor will be the
most remote from the hole for the posterior anchor
tooth. Anterior teeth may be included in the isolation
to provide finger rests on dry teeth and better access
and visibility for the operator and assistant.
When operating on the premolars, punch holes to include two teeth distally, and extend anteriorly to include the opposite lateral incisor.
When operating on the molars, punch holes as far
distally as possible, and extend anteriorly to include
the opposite lateral incisor.
Isolation of a minimum of three teeth is recommended except when endodontic therapy is indicated, and in that case only the tooth to be treated is
isolated. Obviously, the number of teeth to be treated
as well as the tooth surface will influence the pattern
of isolation.
The distance between holes is equal to the distance
from the center of one tooth to the center of the adjacent tooth, measured at the level of the gingival tissue. Generally, this is approximately 1/4 inch (6.3 mm).
When the distance between holes is excessive, the
dam material is excessive and wrinkles between the
teeth. Conversely, too little distance between holes
causes the dam to stretch, resulting in space around
the teeth and leakage. When the distance is correct,
the dam intimately adapts to the teeth and covers and
slightly retracts the interdental tissue.
When the rubber dam is applied to the maxillary
teeth, the first holes punched (after the identification
hole) are for the central incisors. These holes are positioned approximately 1 inch (25 mm) from the superior border of the dam (Fig. 10-23, A), providing sufficient material to cover the patient's upper lip. For a
patient with a large upper lip or mustache, position
the holes more than an inch from the edge. Conversely, for a child or an adult with a small upper lip,
the holes should be positioned less than an inch from
the edge. Once the holes for the incisors are located,
the remaining holes are punched.

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

A, Isolation for operating on incisors and mesial surface of canines. B and C, Increasi ng access by application of metal retainer over dam and adjacent non-isolated tooth.
FIG. 10-22

10-23 Hole position. A, When maxillary teeth are to be isolated, the first holes punched are
for central incisors, approximately 1 inch (2.5 cm) from superior border. B, Hole position when
anchor tooth is mandibular first molar. C, Hole position when anchor tooth is mandibular second molar. D, Hole position when anchor tooth is mandibular third molar. E, Hole position when
anchor tooth is mandibular first premolar. F, Hole position when anchor tooth is mandibular second premolar. Note the hole punched in each of these six representative rubber dam sheets for
i dentification of the upper left corner (arrow in A).
FIG

When the rubber dam is applied to the mandibular
teeth, the first hole punched (after the identification
hole) is for the posterior anchor tooth that is to receive the retainer. To determine the proper location,
mentally divide the rubber dam into three vertical
sections: left, middle, and right. If the anchor tooth is
the mandibular first molar, punch the hole for this

tooth at a point halfway from the superior edge to the
inferior edge and at the junction of the right (or left)
and middle thirds (Fig. 10-23, B). If the anchor tooth
is the second or third molar, the position for the hole
moves toward the inferior border and slightly toward
the center of the rubber dam, as compared to the first
molar hole just described (Fig. 10-23, C and D). If the

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

anchor tooth is the first premolar, the hole is placed
toward the superior border, compared with the hole
for the first molar, and also toward the center of the
dam (Fig. 10-23, E). The farther posterior the mandibular anchor tooth, the more dam material is required to come from behind the retainer over the upper lip. Fig. 10-24 illustrates the difference in the
amount of dam required, comparing the first premolar and the second molar as anchor teeth. The distances may also be compared by noting the length of
dam between the superior edge of the dam and the
position of the hole for the posterior anchor tooth (see
Fig. 10-23, B to F).
When a cervical retainer is to be applied to isolate a
Class V lesion, a heavier rubber dam is usually recommended for better tissue retraction, and the hole for
the tooth should be punched slightly facial to the arch
form to compensate for the extension of the dam to the
cervical area. The farther gingivally the lesion extends,
the further the hole must be positioned from the arch
form. In addition, the hole should be slightly larger,
and the distance between it and the holes for the adjacent teeth should be slightly increased (Fig. 10-25).
When a thinner rubber dam is used, smaller holes
must be punched to achieve an adequate seal around
the teeth because the thin dam has greater elasticity.
Until these guidelines and suggestions related to hole
position are mastered, the inexperienced operator may
choose to use commercial products to aid in locating hole
position (Fig. 10-26). A rubber stamp is available that imprints both permanent and primary arch forms on the
rubber dam, and several sheets of dam material can be
stamped in advance. A plastic template can also be used
to mark hole position. Experience eliminates the need for

10-24
The farther posteriorly the mandibular anchor
tooth, the more dam material is required to come from behind
retainer over upper lip.
FIG

these aids. Accurate hole location is best achieved by
noting the patient's arch form and tooth position. However, understanding the principles of hole punching is
still helpful when using a stamp or template.
Placement. Before placing the rubber dam, the dental chair should be adjusted for optimal patient comfort
and access for the operator and assistant. The patient's
head and chest should not be lower than the feet. It may
be necessary to remove debris and calculus from the
teeth to be isolated.
Usually, administering the anesthetic precedes application of the rubber dam. This allows for the beginning
of profound anesthesia and more comfortable retainer
placement on the anchor tooth. Occasionally, the posterior anchor tooth in the maxillary arch may need to be
anesthetized if it is remote from the anesthetized operating site.
The technique for application of the rubber dam is
presented by numerous authors .6,7,11,27 The step-by-step
application and removal of the rubber dam using the
maxillary left first molar for the posterior retainer and
including the maxillary right lateral incisor as the anterior anchor is described and illustrated here. The procedure is described as if the operator and assistant are
working together. However, application and removal of
the rubber dam is often the responsibility of a single
person, in which case that individual performs the described duties for both the operator and the assistant.
Following the administration of the local anesthetic,
many operators delegate rubber dam application to a
second chairside assistant, permitting the operator to
treat another patient.
When compared to the alternative procedures discussed in a later section, the illustrated procedure allows the retainer and dam to be placed sequentially.
This provides for maximal visibility when placing the
retainer, which reduces the risk of impinging gingival

Hole position for tooth (maxillary right canine) to
receive cervical retainer is positioned facially to arch form.

FIG. 10-25

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

tissue. For most operators this is a simpler procedure
than placing the retainer and dam simultaneously. Isolating a greater number of teeth, as illustrated in this
procedure, is indicated for quadrant operative procedures. For limited operative procedures, it is often acceptable to isolate fewer teeth. The general rule for limited isolation is to include one tooth posterior and two
teeth anterior to the tooth (teeth) being operated on
(Fig. 10-27).
The application procedure is described for righthanded operators. Left-handed users should substitute
left where right is described. Each step number has a corresponding illustration.
Step 1: Testing and Lubricating the Proximal Contacts. The operator receives dental floss from the assis-

tant to test the interproximal contacts and remove debris from the teeth to be isolated. Passing (or attempts to
pass) floss through the contacts identifies any sharp
edges of restorations or enamel that must be smoothed
or removed to prevent tearing the dam. Using waxed
dental tape may lubricate tight contacts to facilitate dam
placement. Tight contacts that are difficult to floss but
do not cut or fray the floss may be wedged apart slightly
to permit placement of the rubber dam. A blunt hand instrument may be used for separation. For some clinical
situations, the proximal portion of the tooth to be restored may need to be partially prepared to eliminate a
sharp or difficult contact before the dam is placed.
Step 2: Punching the Holes. It is recommended that
the assistant punch the holes after assessing the arch
form and tooth alignment. However, some operators prefer to have the assistant prepunch the dam using holes
marked by a template or a rubber dam stamp.
Step 3: Lubricating the Dam. The assistant lubricates both sides of the rubber dam in the area of the
punched holes using a cotton roll or gloved fingertip to
apply the lubricant. This facilitates passing the rubber

FIG 10-26

Commercial products to aid in locating hole position.

dam through the contacts. The lips and especially the
corners of the mouth may be lubricated with petroleum
jelly or cocoa butter to prevent irritation.
Step 4: Selecting the Retainer. The operator receives
(from the assistant) the rubber dam retainer forceps
with the selected retainer and floss tie in position (A).
The free end of the tie should exit from the cheek side of
the retainer. Try the retainer on the tooth to verify retainer stability. If the retainer fits poorly, it is removed
either for adjustment or selection of a different size . 32
(Retainer adjustment, if needed to provide stability, is
presented in the previous section, Rubber Dam Retainer).
Whenever the forceps is holding the retainer, care
should be taken not to open the retainer more than necessary to secure it in the forceps. Stretching the retainer
open for extended periods causes it to lose its elastic recovery. Retainers that have been deformed ("sprung"),
such as the one shown in B, should be discarded.
Step 5: Testing the Retainer's Stability and Retention. If during trial placement the retainer seems ac-

ceptable, remove the forceps. Test the retainer's stability
and retention by lifting gently in an occlusal direction
with a fingertip under the bow of the retainer. An improperly fitting retainer will rock or be easily dislodged.
Step 6: Positioning the Dam Over the Retainer. Before applying the dam, the floss tie may be threaded
through the anchor hole, or it may be left on the underside of the dam. With the forefingers, stretch the anchor
hole of the dam over the retainer (bow first) and then
under the jaws. The lip of the hole must pass completely
under the jaws. The forefingers then may thin out, to a
single thickness, the septal dam for the mesial contact of
the retainer tooth and attempt to pass it through the
contact, lip of the hole first. The septal dam must always
pass through its respective contact in single thickness.
If it does not pass through readily, it should be passed
through with dental tape later in the procedure.

FIG 10-27

Limited isolation for operating maxillary left second premolar.

C H A P T E R 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

Placement. Steps 1 to 8.

Step 7. Applying the Napkin. The operator now gathers the rubber dam in the left hand while the assistant
inserts the fingers and thumb of the right (or left) hand
through the napkin's opening and grasps the bunched
dam held by the operator.
Step 8: Positioning the Napkin. The assistant then
pulls the bunched dam through the napkin and positions it on the patient's face. The operator helps by po-

sitioning the napkin on the patient's right side. The napkin reduces skin contact with the dam.
Step 9: Attaching the Frame. The operator unfolds
the dam. (If an identification hole was punched, it is
used to identify the upper left corner.) The assistant aids
in unfolding the dam and, while holding the frame in
place, attaches the dam to the metal projections on the left
side of the frame. Simultaneously, the operator stretches

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

Placement.

and attaches the dam on the right side. The frame is positioned outside the dam. The curvature of the frame
should be concentric with the patient's face. The dam
lies between the frame and napkin. Either the operator
or assistant attaches the dam along the inferior border of
the frame. Attaching the dam to the frame at this time
controls the dam to provide access and visibility. Secure
the free ends of the floss tie to the frame.
Step 10 (Optional): Attaching the Neck Strap. The
assistant attaches the neck strap to the left side of the
frame and passes it behind the patient's neck. The operator then attaches it to the right side of the frame. Neck
strap tension is adjusted to stabilize the frame and hold
the frame (and periphery of the dam) gently against the
face and away from the operating field. If desired, using
soft tissue paper between the neck and strap may prevent contact of the patient's neck against the strap.
Step 11: Passing the Dam through Posterior
Contact. If there is a tooth distal to the retainer, the distal
edge of the posterior anchor hole should be passed
through the contact (single thickness, with no folds) to
ensure a seal around the anchor tooth. If necessary, use
waxed dental tape to assist in this procedure (see Step 15
for the use of tape). If the retainer comes off unintentionally as this is done or during subsequent procedures, passage of the dam through the distal contact anchors the
dam sufficiently to allow easier reapplication of the retainer or placement of an adjusted or different retainer.
Step 12 (Optional): Applying Compound. If the stability of the retainer is questionable, low-fusing modeling compound may be applied. The assistant heats the
end of a stick of compound in an open flame and tempers it by holding it in water for a few seconds. While
the assistant holds the unheated end, the operator
pinches off a sufficient amount to form a cone about
1/2 inch (12.7 mm) long.
The assistant should ensure dryness by directing a
few short bursts from the air syringe on the occlusal surface of the tooth before compound placement. The operator positions the compound cone on the ball of the
gloved forefinger, briefly resoftens the tip of the cone in
the flame, and carries the compound to its place, cover-

Steps 9 to 11.

ing the bow of the retainer and part of the occlusal surface of the tooth. The compound should not cover the
holes in the jaws of the retainer. The compound will adhere to the tooth if the tooth is dry.
Step 13: Applying the Anterior Anchor (If Needed).
The operator passes the dam over the anterior anchor
tooth, anchoring the anterior portion of the rubber dam.
Usually, the dam passes easily through the mesial and
distal contacts of the anchor tooth if it is passed in single thickness starting with the lip of the hole. Stretching
the lip of the hole and sliding it back and forth aids in
positioning the septum. When the contact farthest from
the retainer is minimal ("light"), an anchor may be required in the form of a double thickness of dental tape
or a narrow strip of dam material that is stretched, inserted, and released (see Fig. 10-20, A and B). If the contact is open, a rolled piece of dam material may be used
(as shown in Fig. 10-36).
Step 14: Passing the Septa Through the Contacts
Without Tape. The operator passes the septa through as
many contacts as possible without the use of dental tape
by stretching the septal dam faciogingivally and linguogingivally with the forefingers. Each septum must not
be allowed to bunch or fold. Rather, its passage through
the contact should be started with a single edge and continued with a single thickness. Passing the dam through
as many contacts as possible without using dental tape
is urged because the use of tape always increases the
risk of tearing holes in the septa. Slight separation (wedging) of the teeth is sometimes an aid when the contacts
are extremely tight. Pressure from a blunt hand instrument (e.g., beaver-tail burnisher) applied in the facial
embrasure gingival to the contact usually is sufficient to
obtain enough separation to permit the septum to pass
through the contact.
Step 15: Passing the Septa Through the Contacts
With Tape. Use waxed dental tape to pass the dam
through the remaining contacts. Tape is preferred over
floss because its wider dimension more effectively carries the rubber septa through the contacts. Also, tape is
not as likely to cut the septa. The waxed variety makes
passage easier and decreases the chances for cutting

CHAPTER 1 0

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

Placement. Steps 12 to 17.

holes in the septa or tearing the edges of the holes. The
leading edge of the septum should be over the contact,
ready to be drawn into and through the contact with the
tape. As before, the septal rubber should be kept in single thickness with no folds. The tape should be placed
at the contact on a slight angle. With a good finger rest
on the tooth, the tape should be controlled so that it
slides (not snaps) through the proximal contact, thus
preventing damage to the interdental tissues. Once the
leading edge of the septum has passed the contact, the
remaining interseptal dam can be carried through more
easily.
Step 16 (Optional): Technique for Using Tape. Often, several passes with dental tape are required to carry
a reluctant septum through a tight contact. When this
happens, previously passed tape should be left in the
gingival embrasure until the entire septum has been successfully placed with subsequent passage of tape. This
prevents a partially passed septum from being removed
or torn. The double strand of tape is removed from the
facial.
Step 17: Inverting the Dam Interproximally. Invert
the dam into the gingival sulcus to complete the seal
around the tooth and prevent leakage. Often, the dam inverts itself as the septa are passed through the contacts

as a result of the dam being stretched gingivally The operator should verify that the dam is inverted interproximally. Inversion in this region is best accomplished
with dental tape.
Step 18: Inverting the Dam Faciolingually. With
the edges of the dam inverted interproximally, complete the inversion facially and lingually using an explorer or a beaver-tail burnisher while the assistant directs a stream of air onto the tooth. This is done by
moving the explorer around the neck of the tooth facially and lingually with the tip perpendicular to the
tooth surface or directed slightly gingivally. A dry surface prevents the dam from sliding out of the crevice.
Alternatively, the dam can be inverted facially and lingually by drying the tooth while stretching the dam
gingivally and then releasing it slowly.
Step 19 (Optional): Using a Saliva Ejector. The use
of a saliva ejector is optional because most patients are
able, and usually prefer, to swallow excess saliva. Furthermore, salivation is greatly reduced when profound
anesthesia is obtained. If salivation is a problem, the operator or assistant uses cotton pliers to pick up the dam
lingual to the mandibular incisors and cuts a small hole
through which the saliva ejector is inserted. The hole
should be positioned so that the rubber dam helps sup-

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

Placement.

port the weight of the ejector, preventing pressure on
the delicate tissues in the floor of the mouth.
Step 20: Confirming a Properly Applied Rubber
Dam. The properly applied rubber dam will be securely
positioned and comfortable to the patient. The patient
should be assured that the rubber dam does not prevent
swallowing or closing the mouth (about halfway) when
there is a pause in the procedure.
Step 21: Checking for Access and Visibility. Check
to see that the completed rubber dam provides maximal
access and visibility for the operative procedure.
Step 22: Inserting the Wedges. For proximal surface
preparations (Classes 11, III, and IV), many operators
consider the insertion of interproximal wedges as the final step in rubber dam application. Wedges are generally round toothpick ends about 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) in
length that are snugly inserted into the gingival embrasures from the facial or lingual embrasure, whichever is
greater, using No. 110 pliers.
To facilitate wedge insertion, first stretch the dam
slightly by fingertip pressure in the direction opposite
wedge insertion (A), and then insert the wedge while
slowly releasing the dam. This results in a passive dam
under the wedge (i.e., the dam will not rebound the
wedge) and prevents bunching or tearing of the septal

Steps 18 to 22.

dam during wedge insertion. The inserted wedges appear in B.
Removal. Before removal of the rubber dam, rinse
and suction away any debris that may have collected to
prevent its falling into the floor of the mouth during the
removal procedure. If a saliva ejector was used, remove
it at this time. Each numbered step has a corresponding
illustration.
Step 1: Cutting the Septa. Stretch the dam facially,
pulling the septal rubber away from the gingival tissues
and tooth. Protect the underlying soft tissue by placing
a fingertip beneath the septum. Clip each septum with
blunt-tipped scissors, freeing the dam from the interproximal spaces, but leave the dam over the anterior
and posterior anchor teeth. To prevent inadvertent soft
tissue damage, curved nose scissors are preferred.
Step 2: Removing the Retainer. Engage the retainer
with retainer forceps. It is unnecessary to remove any
compound, if used, because it will break free as the retainer is spread and lifted from the tooth. While the operator removes the retainer, the assistant releases the
neck strap, if used, from the left side of the frame.
Step 3: Removing the Dam. Once the retainer is removed, release the dam from the anterior anchor tooth
and remove the dam and frame simultaneously. While

CHAPTER 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

Removal. Steps 1 to 6.

doing this, caution the patient not to bite on newly inserted amalgam restorations until the occlusion can be
evaluated.
Step 4: Wiping the Lips. Wipe the patient's lips with
the napkin immediately after the dam and frame are removed. This helps to prevent saliva from getting on the
patient's face and is comforting to the patient.
Step 5: Rinsing the Mouth and Massaging the Tissue. Rinse the teeth and mouth using air-water spray

and the high-volume evacuator. To enhance circulation,
particularly around the anchor teeth, massage the tissue
around the teeth that were isolated.
Step 6: Examining the Dam. Lay the sheet of rubber
dam over a light-colored flat surface or hold it up to the
operating light to determine that no portion of the rubber dam has remained between or around the teeth.
Such a remnant will cause gingival inflammation.
Alternative/Additional Methods and Factors. The
procedure just detailed describes the method of sequentially placing the retainer and rubber dam on the anchor
tooth. Some operators prefer alternative methods. In the
hands of inexperienced operators, these alternative
methods may not be as successful because of reduced
visibility of the gingival tissues.

Applying the Dam and Retainer Simultaneously.

The retainer and dam may be placed simultaneously to
reduce the risk of the retainer being swallowed or aspirated before the dam is placed. This also solves the occasional difficulty of trying to pass the dam over a previously placed retainer, the bow of which is pressing
against oral soft tissues.
In this method, first apply the posterior retainer to
verify a stable fit. Remove the retainer and, with forceps
still holding the retainer, pass the bow through the
proper hole from the underside of the dam (the lubricated rubber dam is held by the assistant) (Fig. 10-28, A).
The free end of the floss tie may remain on the underside of the dam, or it may be threaded through the anchor hole before the retainer bow is inserted. When using a retainer with lateral wings, place the retainer in the
hole punched for the anchor tooth by stretching the dam
to engage these wings (Fig. 10-29). Winged retainers are
rarely used because the wings may interfere with subsequent procedures.
The operator grasps the handle of the forceps in the
right hand and gathers the dam with the left hand to visualize clearly the jaws of the retainer and facilitate its
placement (see Fig. 10-28, B).

C H A PT E R 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

FIG 10-28 A, Bow being passed through posterior anchor hole from underside of dam. B, Gatheri ng dam to facilitate placement of retainer. C, Positioning retainer on anchor tooth. D, Stretchi ng anchor hole borders over and under jaws of retainer.

The operator conveys the retainer (with dam) into the
mouth and positions it on the anchor tooth. Care is necessary when applying the retainer to prevent the jaws from
sliding gingivally and impinging on the soft tissue. The
retainer should be opened slightly and moved occlusally
when gingival tissue is trapped (see Fig. 10-28, C).
The assistant gently pulls the inferior border of the
dam toward the chin while the operator positions the superior border over the upper lip. As the assistant holds
the borders of the dam, the operator uses the second or
middle finger of both hands, one finger facial and the
other finger lingual to the bow, to pass the anchor hole
borders over and under the jaws of the retainer (see Fig.
10-28, D). At this point, the application procedure continues as was previously described, beginning with Step 7.
Applying the Dam Before the Retainer. The dam
may be stretched over the anchor tooth before the retainer is placed. The advantage of this method is not having to manipulate the dam over the retainer. The operator
places the retainer, while the dental assistant stretches
and holds the dam over the anchor tooth (Fig. 10-30). The
disadvantage is the reduction in visibility of underlying
gingival tissue, which may become impinged upon by
the retainer.
Cervical Retainer Placement. The use of a No. 212
cervical retainer for restoration of Class V tooth preparations was recommended by Markley. When punching the holes in the rubber dam, recall that the hole for

F I G 10-29

Lip of hole for anchor tooth is stretched to engage
l ateral wings of retainer.

FIG 10-30 Retainer applied after dam is stretched over posterior anchor tooth.

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

FIG 10-31

Applying a cervical retainer. A, Hole for maxillary right central incisor is punched
facial to arch form. B, Isolation is extended to include first premolars; metal posterior retainers
are unnecessary. C, First, position lingual jaw touching height of contour, while keeping facial
jaw from touching tooth; steady retainer with fingers of left hand using index finger under lingual
bow and thumb under facial bow. D, Final position of lingual jaw after gently moving it apical
of height of contour, with fingers continually supporting and guiding retainer and with facial jaw
away from tooth. E, Stretch facial rubber apically by thumb to expose lesion and soft tissue, with
forefinger maintaining position of lingual jaw and with facial jaw not touching. F, Facial jaw havi ng apically retracted tissue and dam and in position against tooth 0.5 to 1 mm apical of lesion.
Note that thumb has now moved from under facial bow to apply holding pressure, while index
finger continues to maintain the lingual jaw position. G, Apply compound over and under bow
and into the gingival embrasures, while fingers of left hand hold retainer's position. H, Application of retainer is completed by addition of compound to other bow and into gingival embrasures. Note that retainer holes are accessible to forceps for removal. I, Removal of retainer by
ample spreading of retainer jaws before lifting from the site of the operation.

the tooth to receive this retainer for a facial cervical
restoration should be positioned facially (a few millimeters) to the arch form (Fig. 10-31, A). Also, the distance
to the adjacent holes should be increased approximately
1 mm on each side. If the cervical retainer is to be placed
on an incisor, recall that isolation should be extended to
include the first premolars, and that metal retainers usually are not needed to anchor the dam (see Fig. 10-31, B).
If the cervical retainer is to be placed on a canine or a
posterior tooth, remember to position the anchor tooth
retainer sufficiently posterior so as not to interfere with

placement of the cervical retainer. If this is not possible,
the anchor tooth retainer should be removed before positioning the cervical retainer.
Before positioning the cervical retainer, have a stick of
low-fusing compound and a flame burner available. Engage the jaws of the cervical retainer with the forceps,
spread the retainer sufficiently, and position the lingual
j aw against the tooth at the height of contour (see Fig.
10-31, C). Gently move the jaw gingivally, depressing
the dam and soft tissue, until the jaw of the retainer is
positioned slightly apical of the height of contour (see

CHAPTER 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

Fig. 10-31, D). Exercise care not to allow the lingual jaw
to pinch the lingual gingiva or injure the gingival attachment. While positioning the lingual jaw, the index
finger of the left hand (for a right-handed operator)
should help in supporting and guiding the retainer jaw
gingivally to the proper location.
While stabilizing the lingual jaw with the index finger, use the thumb of the left hand to pull the dam apically to expose the facial lesion and gingival crest (see
Fig. 10-31, E). Position the facial jaw gingival to the lesion and release the dam held by the thumb. Next, move
the thumb onto the facial jaw to secure it (see Fig. 10-31,
F). Exercise care while positioning the facial jaw not to
scar the enamel or cementum. The tip of each jaw should
not be sharp and should conform to the contour of the
engaged tooth surface. Do not position the jaw too close
to the lesion because of the danger of collapsing carious
or weak tooth structure. Such proximity would also
limit access and visibility to the operating site. As a rule,
the facial jaw should be 0.5 to 1 mm gingival to the
anticipated location of the gingival margin of the completed tooth preparation. While maintaining the retainer's position with the fingers of the left hand, remove the forceps.
Often, the No. 212 retainer needs to be stabilized on
the tooth with compound. If so, while the operator positions the retainer, the assistant heats and tempers the
end of a stick of compound. Maintaining the retainer's
position with the fingers of the left hand, the operator
presses the softened compound under and over one
bow. With a moistened thumb and forefinger, press the
compound onto the incisal (occlusal) surface(s) and into
the interproximal area(s), locking the compound in the
embrasure(s) (see Fig. 10-31, G). The cervical area should
be examined for adequate isolation and access before
the compound hardens. If additional retraction is necessary, engage the retainer and move the facial jaw gingivally while the compound is soft. Cool the compound
with air. Only after the compound has been cooled and
hardened should the fingers of the left hand be removed
from the retainer. Apply compound in a similar manner
to the other bow of the retainer (see Fig. 10-31, H).
If the facial lip of the dam is not already inverted into
the gingival sulcus, dry the tooth and tease the dam to
proper position using a suitable blunt instrument. Continuous inversion provides coverage of soft tissue, slight
retraction and some protection of marginal gingiva, and
isolation from oral fluids.
If it is necessary to move the facial jaw gingivally during the operation subsequent to the initial placement of
the retainer, the retainer is easily removed with the retainer forceps and reapplied. Using compound to stabilize a cervical retainer is recommended because the retainer may be inadvertently bumped out of place during
the operative procedure. Also, it is a convenient resting
place for the operator's fingers.

To remove the cervical retainer, engage it with the forceps, spread the jaws to free the compound support, and
lift it incisally (occlusally), being careful to spread the
retainer sufficiently to prevent the jaws from scraping
the tooth or damaging the newly inserted restoration
(see Fig. 10-31, I). Free the embrasures of any remaining
compound before removing the rubber dam.
A modified No. 212 retainer is recommended, especially for treatment of cervical lesions with greatly
extended gingival margins. The modified No. 212 retainer can be ordered, if specified, or the operator can
modify an existing No. 212 retainer. The modification
technique involves heating each jaw of the retainer in
an open flame, and then bending it with No. 110 pliers from its oblique orientation to a more horizontal
one. Allowing the modified retainer to bench-cool returns it to its original hardened state. (The principle involved in this modification is illustrated in Figure 21-18.)
Fixed Bridge Isolation. It is sometimes necessary to
isolate one or more abutment teeth of a fixed bridge. Indications for fixed bridge isolation include restoration
of an adjacent proximal surface and cervical restoration
of an abutment tooth.
The technique suggested for this procedure is as follows. 4 The rubber dam is punched as usual except for
providing one large hole for each unit in the bridge.
Fixed bridge isolation is accomplished after the remainder of the dam is applied (Fig. 10-32, A). A blunted,
curved suture needle with dental floss attached is
threaded from the facial aspect through the hole for the
anterior abutment and then under the anterior connector and back through the same hole on the lingual side
(see Fig. 10-32, B). The needle's direction is then reversed as it is passed from the lingual side through the
hole for the second bridge unit, then under the same anterior connector, and through the hole of the second
bridge unit on the facial side (see Fig. 10-32, C). A square
knot is then tied with the two ends of the floss, thereby
pulling the dam material snugly around the connector
and into the gingival embrasure. The free ends of the
floss should be cut closely so they neither interfere with
access and visibility nor become entangled in a rotating
instrument. Each terminal abutment of the bridge is isolated by this method (see Fig. 10-32, D). If the floss knot
on the facial aspect interferes with cervical restoration of
an abutment tooth, the operator can tie the septum from
the lingual. Removal of the rubber dam isolating a fixed
bridge is accomplished by cutting the interseptal rubber
over the connectors with scissors and removing the floss
ties (see Fig. 10-32, E). As always, after dam removal the
operator needs to verify that no dam segments are missing and massage the adjacent gingival tissue.
Substitution of a Retainer With a Matrix. When a
matrix band must be applied to the posterior anchor
tooth, the jaws of the retainer often prevent proper

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

Procedure for isolating a fixed bridge. A, Apply dam except in area of fixed bridge.
B, Thread blunted suture needle from facial to lingual aspect through anterior abutment hole
and then under anterior connector and back through same hole on lingual surface. C, Pass needle facially through hole for second bridge unit and then under the same connector and through
the hole for the second unit. D, Tie off first septum. E, Cut posterior septum to initiate removal
of dam.
FIG . 10-32

Substituting retainer with matrix on terminal tooth. A, Completed tooth preparation
of terminal tooth with retainer in place. B, Dentist and assistant stretch dam distally and gingivally as retainer is being removed. C, Retainer removed before placement of matrix. D, Completed matrix in place. To maximize access and visibility during insertion, the mouth mirror is
used to reflect dam distally and occlusally.

FIG . 10-33

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

positioning and wedging of the matrix (Fig. 10-33, A).
Successful application of the matrix can be accomplished by substituting the retainer with the matrix.
Fig. 10-33, B through D, illustrates this exchange on a
mandibular right molar as the index finger of the operator depresses gingivally and distally the rubber dam
adjacent to the facial jaw while the assistant similarly
depresses the dam on the lingual side. After the matrix
band is placed, the tension is released on the dam, allowing it to invert around the band. The matrix, unlike
the retainer, has neither jaws nor bow, so there is a tendency for the dam to slip occlusally and over the matrix
unless dryness is maintained.
The operator obtains access and visibility for insertion of the restorative material by reflecting the dam distally and occlusally with the mirror. However, care must
be exercised not to stretch the dam so much that it is
pulled away from the matrix, permitting leakage around
the tooth or slippage over the matrix.
Following insertion, the occlusal portion is contoured
before removing the matrix. To complete the procedure
the operator has the choice of removing the matrix, replacing the retainer, and completing the contouring, or
removing the matrix and rubber dam and completing
the contouring. To maintain isolation throughout the
procedure, it is preferable to replace the retainer before
completing the contouring.
Variations with Age. The age of a patient often dictates changes in the procedures of rubber dam application. A few variations are described here.
Because young patients have smaller dental arches
than adult patients, holes should be punched in the dam
accordingly. For primary teeth, isolation is usually from
the most posterior tooth to the canine on the same side.
The sheet of rubber dam may be smaller (5 x 5 inch
[12.5 x 12.5 cm]) for the young patient so that the rubber material does not cover the nose.

FIG . 10-34

On a child, the rubber dam is often attached to a frame
before holes are punched. The dam is then positioned over the
anchor tooth before a retainer is applied (as in Fig. 10-30).

Some operators prefer to alter the procedure of application for a young patient. The unpunched rubber dam
is attached to the frame, the holes are punched, the dam
with the frame is applied over the anchor tooth, and the
retainer is applied (Fig. 10-34). Since the dam is generally in place for shorter intervals than for the adult patient, the napkin might not be used.
The jaws of the retainers used on primary and young
permanent teeth need to be directed more gingivally because of short clinical crowns or because the anchor
tooth's height of contour is below the crest of the gingival tissue. The S.S. White No. 27 retainer is recommended for primary teeth. The Ivory No. W14 retainer
is recommended for young permanent teeth.
Isolated teeth with short clinical crowns (other than
the anchor tooth) may require ligation to hold the dam
in position. Ligation is permissible but should be used
only when necessary because of possible damage to gingival tissues. Ligatures should be removed first during
the procedure of rubber dam removal. Generally, ligation is unnecessary if a sufficient number of teeth are
isolated by the rubber dam. However, when ligatures
are indicated, a surgeon's knot is used to secure the ligature (Fig. 10-35). Ligatures may be removed by teasing
them occlusally with an explorer or by cutting them
with a hand instrument or scissors.
A small piece of rubber dam material may be rolled,
stretched, and placed into a diastema to serve as an anterior anchor (Fig. 10-36).
Errors in Application and Removal. Certain errors
in application and removal can prevent adequate moisture control, reduce access and visibility, or cause injury
to the patient.
Off-center arch form. A rubber dam punched offcenter (off-center arch form) may not adequately shield
the patient's oral cavity, allowing foreign matter to escape down the patient's throat. An off-center dam can

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

Surgeon's knot. A, Dental tape is placed around tooth gingival to height of contour and
a knot is tied by first making two loops with the free ends, followed by a single loop (B). C, Free
ends are not cut but tied to frame to serve as a reminder that ligature is in place. D, To remove
ligature, simply cut tape with scalpel blade, amalgam knife, or scissors.
FIG 10-35

A piece of rubber dam material may be rolled,
stretched, and placed in diastema to serve as anterior anchor.
FIG 10-36

result in an excess of dam material superiorly that may
occlude the patient's nasal airway (Fig. 10-37, A). If this
happens, the superior border of the dam can be folded
under or cut from around the patient's nose (see Fig.
10-37, B and C). Proper hole placement, however, will

correctly position the dam. It is important to verify that
the rubber dam frame has been applied so that its ends
are not dangerously close to the patient's eyes.
Inappropriate distance between the holes. Inappropriate distance between the holes is a problem. Too
little distance between holes precludes adequate isolation because the hole margins in the rubber dam are
stretched and will not fit snugly around the necks of the
teeth. Conversely, too much distance results in excess
septal width causing the dam to wrinkle between the
teeth, interfere with proximal access, and not provide
adequate tissue retraction.
Incorrect arch form of holes. If the punched arch
form is too small (incorrect arch form), the holes will be
stretched open around the teeth, permitting leakage. If
the punched arch form is too large, the dam will wrinkle around the teeth and thus may interfere with access.
Inappropriate retainer. An inappropriate retainer
may: (1) be too small, resulting in occasional breakage
when the jaws are overspread, (2) be unstable on the
anchor tooth, (3) impinge on soft tissue, or (4) impede
wedge placement. An appropriate retainer should
maintain a stable four-point contact with the anchor
tooth and not interfere with wedge placement.

CHAPTER 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

FIG . 10-37 A, inappropriately punched dam may occlude patient's nasal airway. B, Excess dam
material along superior border folded under to proper position. C, Excess dam material cut from
around patient's nose.

Retainer-pinched tissue. The jaws and prongs of the
rubber dam retainer usually slightly depress the tissue,
but they should not pinch or impinge on it.
Shredded or torn dam. Care should be exercised to
prevent shredding or tearing the dam, especially during
hole punching or passing the septa through the contacts.
Moisture control is possible only if the dam is intact.
Incorrect location of hole for Class V lesion. If
there is an incorrect location of the hole for a Class V lesion and the hole is not punched facial to the arch form,
circulation in the interproximal tissue will be diminished because of the added pressure once the dam and
cervical retainer are in place.
Sharp tips on No. 212 retainer. Sharp tips on a No.
212 retainer should be sufficiently dulled to prevent
damaging the cementum.
Incorrect technique for cutting septa. During removal of the rubber dam an incorrect technique for cutting the septa may result in cut tissue or a torn septa.
Stretching the septa away from the gingiva, protecting
the lip and cheek with an index finger, and using curvebeaked scissors decreases the risk of cutting soft tissue
or tearing the septa with the scissors as the septa are cut.

COTTON ROLL ISOLATION
AND CELLULOSE WAFERS
Absorbents, such as cotton rolls and cellulose wafers
(Fig. 10-38), can also provide isolation. Absorbents are
isolation alternatives when rubber dam application is
impractical or impossible. In conjunction with profound
anesthesia, absorbents provide acceptable moisture control for most clinical procedures. Using a saliva ejector
in conjunction with absorbents may further abate salivary flow. The assistant has the responsibility of keeping dry cotton rolls in the mouth. The assistant should
change the cotton rolls when they become saturated. It
is sometimes permissible to suction the free moisture
from a saturated cotton roll in place in the mouth. This
is done by placing the evacuator tip next to the end of
the cotton roll while the operator secures the roll.
Several commercial devices for holding cotton rolls in
position are available (Fig. 10-39). It is generally necessary to remove the holding appliance from the mouth to

FIG . 10-38

Absorbents such as cotton rolls, cellulose wafers,
and gauze sponges provide satisfactory dryness for short periods of time.

FIG .10-39 A cotton roll holder in position.

change the cotton rolls. This is inconvenient and time
consuming; consequently, they are not often used. An
advantage of cotton roll holders is that they may slightly
retract the cheeks and tongue from the teeth, which enhances access and visibility.
Placing a medium-sized cotton roll in the facial
vestibule (Fig. 10-40) isolates the maxillary teeth. Placing a medium-sized cotton roll in the vestibule and a
larger one between the teeth and the tongue (Fig. 10-41)

CHAPTER 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

FIG 10-40 I solate maxillary posterior teeth by placing cotton

FIG 10-42 A throat screen is used during try-in and removal of

roll in vestibule adjacent to teeth.

i ndirect restorations.

wafers may be used to retract the cheek and provide
additional absorbency. After the cotton rolls or cellulose
wafers are in place, the saliva ejector may be positioned. When removing cotton rolls or cellulose wafers,
it may be necessary to moisten them using the airwater syringe to prevent inadvertent removal of the
epithelium from the cheeks, floor of the mouth, or lips.

OTHER ISOLATION TECHNIQUES

A, Position large cotton roll between tongue and
teeth by "rolling" it to place in direction of arrow. B, Properly
positioned facial and lingual cotton rolls improve access and
visibility.
FIG . 10-41

isolates the mandibular teeth. While placement of a cotton roll in the facial vestibule is simple, placement on
the lingual of mandibular teeth is more difficult.
Lingual placement is facilitated by holding the mesial
end of the cotton roll with operative pliers and positioning the cotton roll over the desired location. Use the
index finger of other hand to push the cotton roll gingivally while twisting the cotton roll with the operative
pliers toward the lingual of the teeth. The teeth are then
dried with short blasts from the air syringe. Cellulose

Throat Shields. When the rubber dam is not being
used, throat shields are indicated when there is danger
of aspirating or swallowing small objects. This is particularly important when treating teeth in the maxillary
arch. A gauze sponge (2 x 2 inch [5 x 5 cm]), unfolded
and spread over the tongue and the posterior part of the
mouth, is helpful in recovering small objects, such as an
indirect restoration, should it be dropped (Fig. 10-42).
Without a throat shield, it is possible for a small object
to be aspirated or swallowed (Fig. 10-43). 29
High-Volume Evacuators and Saliva Ejectors. When
a high-speed handpiece is used, air-water spray is supplied through the head of the handpiece to wash the operating site and act as a coolant for the bur and tooth.
High-volume evacuators are preferred for suctioning
water and debris from the mouth (Fig. 10-44) because
saliva ejectors remove water slowly and have little capacity for picking up solids. McWherter 26 showed that
one type of evacuator would remove 1 pint (0.5 L) of
water in 2 seconds, had a 75% to 95% pickup of water in
air, and would remove 100% of solids during cutting
procedures. A practical test for the adequacy of a highvolume evacuator is to submerge the evacuator tip in a
5-oz (150-ml) cup of water. The water should disappear
in approximately 1 second.
The combined use of water spray or air-water spray
and a high-volume evacuator during cutting procedures has the following advantages:

CHAPTER

10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

A

FIG

B

A, Radiograph of swallowed casting in patient's stomach. B, Radiograph of casting
l odged in patient's throat.

10-43

A

B

Position of evacuator tip for maximal removal of water and debris in operating area.
A, With rubber dam applied. B, With cotton roll isolation.
f I G . 10-44

1. Cuttings both of tooth and restorative material, as well
as other debris, are removed from the operating site.
2. A washed operating field improves access and visibility.
3. There is no dehydration of the oral tissues.
4. Without an anesthetic, the patient experiences less
pain.
5. Pauses that are sometimes annoying and time consuming are eliminated.
6. Precious metals are more readily salvaged.
7. Quadrant dentistry is facilitated.
The assistant's responsibility is to place the evacuator
tip as near to the tooth being prepared as possible. However, it should not obstruct the operator's access or vision. Also, the evacuator tip should not be so close to the
handpiece head that the air-water spray is diverted
from the rotary instrument (i.e., bur or diamond). The
assistant should place the evacuator tip in the mouth before the operator positions the handpiece and mirror.
The assistant usually places the tip of the evacuator just
distal to the tooth to be prepared. For maximal efficiency the orifice of the evacuator tip should be positioned so it is parallel to the facial (lingual) surface of
the tooth being prepared. The assistant's right hand
holds the evacuator tip; the left hand manipulates the

air-water syringe. (Hand positions are reversed if the
operator is left-handed.) When the operator needs to examine the progress of tooth preparation, the assistant
rinses and dry the tooth (teeth) using air from the syringe in conjunction with the evacuator.
Most patients do not require the use of saliva ejectors
for removal of saliva because salivary flow is greatly reduced when the operating site is profoundly anesthetized. The dentist or assistant positions the saliva ejector
if needed.
The saliva ejector removes saliva that collects on the
floor of the mouth. It may be used in conjunction with
sponges, cotton rolls, and the rubber dam. It should be
placed in an area least likely to interfere with the operator's movements.
The tip of the ejector must be smooth and made from
a nonirritating material. Disposable, inexpensive plastic
ejectors that may be shaped by bending with the fingers
are preferable because of improved infection control
(Fig. 10-45). The ejector should be placed to prevent occluding its tip with tissue from the floor of the mouth.
Some ejectors are designed to prevent suctioning of tissue. It also may be necessary to adjust the suction for
each patient to prevent this occurrence. A Svedopter is a
helpful device that serves as both a saliva ejector and a
tongue retractor.

CH A P T E R 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

Retraction Cord. When properly applied, retraction
cord often can be used for isolation and retraction in the
direct procedures of treatment of accessible subgingival
areas and in indirect procedures involving gingival margins. When the rubber dam is not used, is impractical, or
is inappropriate, retraction cord, usually moistened
with a noncaustic styptic (e.g., Hemodent, Premier Dental Products Company, King of Prussia, Pennsylvania),
may be placed in the gingival sulcus to control sulcular
seepage and/or hemorrhage. Most brands of retraction
cord are available with and without the vasoconstrictor
epinephrine, which also acts to control sulcular fluids.
To achieve adequate moisture control, retraction cord isolation should be used in conjunction with salivation
control by virtue of profound anesthesia of all tissues of
the operating site. A properly applied retraction cord improves access and visibility and helps prevent abrasion
of gingival tissue during tooth preparation. Retraction
cord may help restrict excess restorative material from
entering the gingival sulcus and provide better access
for contouring and finishing the restorative material.
To use retraction cord, insert the cord after attaining
profound anesthesia and before tooth preparation. When
the proper cord is correctly inserted, its mild physical

FIG 10-45 Saliva ejectors.

and chemical (noncaustic styptic) effects achieve isolation from fluids (along with cotton roll use), provides
access and visibility, and does not cause harm.
Choose a diameter of cord that can be gently inserted into the gingival sulcus and will produce lateral
displacement (a few tenths of a millimeter) of the free
gingiva ("opening" the sulcus) without blanching it
(caused by ischemia due to pressure). The length of
cord should be sufficient to extend approximately
1 mm beyond the gingival width of the tooth preparation. Use a thin, blunt-edged instrument blade or the
side of an explorer to progressively insert the cord. To
prevent displacement of previously inserted cord, the
placement instrument should be moved slightly backward at each step as it is stepped along the cord (Fig.
10-46). Cord placement should not abuse the gingival
tissue or damage the epithelial attachment. If ischemia
of the gingival tissue is observed, the cord may need to
be replaced with a smaller diameter cord. The objective
is to obtain minimal yet sufficient lateral displacement
of the free gingiva and not to force it apically. Cord insertion results in adequate apical retraction of the gingival crest in a short time.
Because of the delicate, thin dimension of the free gingiva on the facial aspect of anterior and premolar teeth,
the smallest diameter cord is often used. If twisted cord
is used, it may be helpful to separate the strands of the
smallest cord to customize a still smaller cord. A second,
usually larger, cord may be placed over (not beside) the
first if additional retraction is necessary.
When a proximal crevice is involved, it may be helpful
to insert a second, usually larger, cord over the initially
inserted cord. This may be indicated when isolating for
an impression to record adjacent gingival margins and
the gingival papilla is difficult to retract.
In procedures for an indirect restoration (e.g., cast onlay), inserting the cord before removal of infected dentin
and placement of any necessary liner assists in providing
maximum moisture control. It also opens the sulcus in
readiness for any beveling of the gingival margins. The
cord may be removed before beveling, or it may be left in

FIG 10-46 Retraction cord placed in gingival crevice. A, Cord placement initiated. B, A thin, flatbladed instrument is used for cord placement. C, Cord placed.

C H A P T E R 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

place during beveling. In either case, a cord should be
reinserted and remain a few minutes before the impression to help ensure an open sulcus for the impression
material to enter.
Inserting the cord as early as possible in the tooth
preparation helps prevent abrasion of the gingival tissue,
thereby reducing the potential for bleeding and allowing
only minimal absorption of any medicament from the
cord into the circulatory system. The cord may be moistened with a noncaustic styptic before insertion if bleeding of fragile tissue is anticipated. (Specific uses of retraction cord are detailed in subsequent technique chapters.)
Mirror and Evacuator Tip Retraction. A secondary
function of the mirror and evacuator tip is to retract the
cheek, lip, and tongue (Fig. 10-47). This is particularly
important when a rubber dam is not used.
Mouth Props. A potential aid to restorative procedures
on posterior teeth (for a lengthy appointment) is a mouth
prop (Fig. 10-48, A). A prop should establish and maintain
suitable mouth opening, thereby relieving the patient's
muscles of this task, which often produces fatigue and
sometimes pain. Moreover, with the use of a prop, the
patient is relieved of the responsibility of maintaining
mouth opening, thereby permitting added relaxation.
The ideal characteristics of a mouth prop are as follows:

vantages. The convenience and cost of the block type
commend it for use in most operative procedures.
The use of a mouth prop may be beneficial to both the
operator and patient. The most outstanding benefits to
the patient are relief of responsibility of maintaining adequate mouth opening and relief of muscle fatigue and
muscle pain. For the dentist, the prop ensures constant
and adequate mouth opening and permits extended or
multiple operations if desired.
Drugs. The use of drugs to control salivation is rarely
indicated in restorative dentistry and is generally limited to atropine. As with any drug, the operator should
be familiar with its indications, contraindications, and
side effects. It is important to remember that atropine is
contraindicated for nursing mothers and patients with
glaucoma. 9
SUMMARY
A thorough knowledge of the preliminary procedures
addressed in this chapter reduces the physical strain on
the dental team associated with daily dental treatment,
reduces patient anxiety associated with dental procedures, and enhance moisture control, thereby improving the quality of operative dentistry.

1. It should be adaptable to all mouths.
2. It should be capable of being easily positioned, with
no patient discomfort.
3. It should be easily adjusted, if necessary, to provide
the proper mouth opening or improve its position in
the mouth.
4. It should be stable once applied.
5. It should be easily and readily removable by the operator or patient in case of emergency.
6. It should be either sterilizable or disposable.
Mouth props of different designs and different materials are available. They are generally available either as
block type or ratchet type (Fig. 10-48, B and C). Although
the ratchet type is adjustable, its size and cost are disad-

FIG . 10-47 Chairside assistant uses air syringe to dry teeth and
to keep mirror free of debris.

FIG. 10-48 Mouth props. A, Block-type prop maintaining mouth opening. B, Block-type prop.
C, Ratchet-type prop.

CHAPTER 10

Preliminary Considerations for Operative Dentistry

REFERENCES

1. ADA Council on Dental Materials, Instruments, and Equipment: Posterior composite resins, J Am Dent Assoc 112:707-

21.
22.

709,1986.
2.
3.

Anusavice KJ, editor: Phillips'science of dental materials, ed 10,
St Louis, 1996, Mosby.
Barghi N, Knight GT, Berry TG: Comparing two methods of
moisture control in bonding to enamel: a clinical study, Oper
Dent 16:130-135, 1991.

4.
5.

6.
7.

Baum L, Phillips RW, Lund MR: Textbook of operative dentistry,
ed 3, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders.
Berglund A, Molin M: Mercury levels in plasma and urine after removal of all amalgam restorations: the effect of using
rubber dams, Dent Mater 13:297-304, 1997.
Black GL: Operative dentistry, ed 8, vol 2, Woodstock,111, 1947,
Medico-Dental.
Brinker HA: Access-the key to success, J Prosthet Dent 28:
391-401, 1972.

Christensen GJ: Using rubber dams to boost quality, quantity
of restorative services, JAm Dent Assoc 125: 81-82, 1994.
9. Ciancio SG, editor: ADA guide to dental therapeutics, ed 1,
Chicago, 1998, American Dental Association.
10. Cochran MA, Miller CH, Sheldrake MA: The efficacy of the
rubber dam as a barrier to the spread of microorganisms during dental treatment, JAm Dent Assoc 119:141-144, 1989.
11. Cunningham PR, Ferguson GW: The instruction of rubber
dam technique, JAm Acad Gold Foil Oper 13: 5-12,1970.
12. Dajani AS et al: Prevention of bacterial endocarditis: recommendations by the American Heart Association, J Am Dent

23.
24.

Dent Assoc 50:301-309, 1955.
25.
26.

27.
28.

14.

31.

32.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

Heling I, Sommer M, Kot I: Rubber dam-an essential safeguard, Quintessence Int 19:377-378, 1988.
Howard WW, Moller RC: Atlas of operative dentistry, ed 3, St
Louis, 1981, Mosby.
Huggins DR: The rubber dam-an insurance policy against
litigation, J Indiana Dent Assoc 65:23-24, 1986.
Ingraham R, Koser JR: An atlas of gold foil and rubber dam procedures, Buena Park, Calif, 1961, Uni-Tro College Press.
Jones CM, Reid JS: Patient and operator attitudes toward rubber dam, ASDC J Dent Child 55:452-454, 1988.
Joynt RB, Davis EL, Schreier PH: Rubber dam usage among
practicing dentists, Oper Dent 14:176-181, 1989.

Nimmo A et al: Particulate inhalation during the removal of
amalgam restorations, J Prosthet Dent 63:228-233, 1990.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration: Bloodborne
pathogens (Federal Register 56: Section 1910, 1030 [26 U.S.C.
653], 64175-64182), Washington, DC, 1991, Occupational
Safety and Health Adminstration.
Peterson JE, Nation WA, Matsson L: Effect of a rubber dam
clamp (retainer) on cementum and junctional epithelium, Oper
Dent 11:42-45, 1986.

33.

34.

Dent 4:105-109, 1992.
15.

Nelson JF: Ingesting an onlay: a case report, JAm Dent Assoc
123:73-74, 1992.

30.

Assoc 128:1142-1151, 1997.

For-rest WR Perez RS: The rubber dam as a surgical drape: protection against AIDS and hepatitis, Gen Dent 37:236-237,1989.
Fusayama T: Total etch technique and cavity isolation, J Esthet

Marshall K, Page J: The use of rubber dam in the UK: a survey, Br Dent 1169:286-291, 1990.
McWherter E: Modern method improvements and works
simplification approach to clinical procedures of the washed
field technic in dentistry, Ark Dent J 28:10, 1957.
Medina JE: The rubber dam-an incentive for excellence,
Dent Clin North Am p. 255-264, March 1967.
Mosteller JH: Restoration of teeth with silver amalgam, J Prosthet Dent 11:288-297, 1961.

29.

8.

13.

Kremers L et al: Effect of rubber dam on mercury exposure
during amalgam removal, Eur J Oral Sci 107:202-207,1999.
Malamed SF: Handbook of local anesthesia, ed 4, St Louis, 1997,
Mosby.
Marcus HW: The role of hypnosis and suggestions in dentistry, J Am Dent Assoc 59:1149-1163, 1959.
Markley MR: Amalgam restorations for ClassV cavities, J Am

Raskin A, Setcos JC, Vreven J: Influence of the isolation
method on the 10-year clinical behaviour of posterior resin
composite restorations, Clin Oral Investig 25:148-152, 2000.
Roy A, Epstein J, Onno E: Latex allergies in dentistry: recognition and recommendations, J Can Dent Assoc 63:297-300,
1997.

35.

Samaranayake LP, Reid J, Evans D: The efficacy of rubber dam
isolation in reducing atmospheric bacterial contamination,
ASDC J Dent Child 56:442-444, 1989.

36.

Shugars DA et al: Musculoskeletal back pain among dentists,
Gen Dent 32:481-485, 1984.

37.
38.

Smales RJ. Rubber dam usage related to restoration quality
and survival, Br Dent J 174:330-333, 1993.
Straffon LH, Dennison JB, More FG: Three-year evaluation of
sealant: effect of isolation on efficacy, J Am Dent Assoc 110:
714-717,1985.

39.

Sturdevant CM, Barton RE, Brauer, JC, editors: The art and science of operative dentistry, ed 1, NewYork, 1968, McGraw-Hill.

I.

II.

III.

I ntroduction, 473
A. Types of esthetic restorative materials, 474
1. Fused porcelain, 474
2. Silicate cement, 475
3. Acrylic resin, 475
4. Composite, 476
5. Glass ionomer, 478
B. Important properties, 478
1. Linear coefficient of thermal
expansion, 479
2. Water absorption, 479
3. Wear resistance, 479
4. Surface texture, 479
5. Radiopacity, 479
6. Modulus of elasticity, 479
7. Solubility, 479
C. Polymerization of composite, 479
1. Polymerization shrinkage, 479
2. Method of polymerization, 480
D. Composite restorations, 481
General considerations for composite
restorations, 481
A. Indications, 482
1. Isolation factors, 482
2. Occlusal factors, 482
3. Operator ability and commitment
factors, 482
B. Contraindications, 482
C. Advantages, 482
D. Disadvantages, 483
Clinical technique, 483
A. Initial clinical procedures, 483
1. Local anesthesia, 483
2. Preparation of the operating site, 483
3. Shade selection, 483

I V.

V.

VI.

4. Isolation of the operating site, 485
5. Other preoperative considerations, 486
B. Tooth preparation for composite
restorations, 486
1. Types of composite tooth preparations, 488
2. Pulpal protection, 492
C. Restorative technique for composite
restorations, 492
1. Preliminary steps for enamel and dentin
bonding, 492
2. Matrix placement, 494
3. Inserting the composite, 495
4. Contouring the composite, 496
5. Polishing the composite, 497
6. Microfill composites, 497
D. Repairing composite restorations, 497
Common problems: causes and potential
solutions, 497
A. Poor isolation of the operating area, 497
B. White line or halo around the enamel
margin, 497
C. Voids, 498
D. Weak or missing proximal contacts (Classes II,
III, and IV), 498
E. Incorrect shade, 498
F. Poor retention, 498
G. Contouring and finishing problems, 498
Controversial issues, 498
A. Liners and bases under composite
restorations, 499
B. Retention in Class V root-surface
preparations, 499
C. Wear problems, 499
D. Gap formation significance, 499
Summary, 499

CHAPTER

II

I NTRODUCTION
The search for an ideal esthetic material for restoring
teeth has resulted in significant improvements in both
esthetic materials and techniques for using them. Composites and the acid-etch technique represent two major
advances .
Adhesive materials that have stronger
bonds to enamel and dentin further simplify restorative
techniques .
The possibilities for innovative uses of
esthetic materials are exciting and almost unlimited.
Many of the specific applications of these materials are
presented in Chapters 12 through 15; this chapter provides a general introduction to composite restorations,
the predominant direct esthetic restorative material
(Fig. 11-1).
Although these materials are referred to as resin-based
composites, composite resins, and other things, this textbook
refers to most direct esthetic restorations as composites.
They are distinguished only from porcelain/ ceramic or
glass-ionomer esthetic restorations. There is also some
information presented about various types of composites, including microfill, hybrid, flowable, and packable.
The choice of a material to restore carious lesions and
other defects in teeth continues to be controversial.
Tooth-colored materials, such as composite, are used in
almost all types and sizes of restorations. Such restorations are accomplished with minimal loss of tooth structure, little or no discomfort, relatively short operating
time, and modest expense to the patient when compared with esthetic porcelain crowns. However, when a
tooth is significantly weakened by extensive defects (especially in areas of heavy occlusal function) and esthetics is of primary concern, the best treatment usually is a
ceramic onlay or crown or a porcelain-fused-to-metal
crown.

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

An interpretation of esthetics primarily is determined
by an individual's perception and is subject to wide
variations. What is pleasing for one patient may be completely unacceptable to another. For example, some people have no objection to gold or other types of metallic
restorations in their front teeth, while most find these
restorations unesthetic.
It is the dentist's responsibility to present all logical
restorative alternatives to a patient, but the patient
should be given an opportunity to help make the final
decision regarding which alternative will be selected.
Explaining the procedure and showing the patient color
photographs and models of teeth that have been restored by various methods are helpful. Computer simulation of possible treatment outcomes, using computer
imaging technology, is also helpful. Many patients are
not aware that some teeth or some parts of the teeth are
not visible during normal lip movements. For example,
the patient in Fig. 11-2 does not show the gingival portion of the teeth, even with a broad smile. The deeply
abraded cervical areas were restored with gold inlays,
which have been in service for over 20 years with no esthetic detriments. Other examples of restoring anterior
teeth with metal restorations are presented in the chapters on amalgam, cast metal, and direct gold (Chapters
18, 20, and 21).
Most people want their teeth to look natural, including areas of the dentition that normally do not show. As
far back as 1959, Skinner 46 wrote, "The esthetic quality of
a restoration may be as important to the mental health of
the patient as the biological and technical qualities of the
restoration are to his physical or dental health." Today,
esthetic considerations are still primary factors for seeking dental treatment.

FIG .11-1 Composite restorations. A and B, Class II composite restoration, before and after. C and
D, Class IV composite restoration, before and after.

CHAPTER

11

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

The lifespan of an esthetic restoration depends on
many factors, including the nature and extent of the initial problem, the treatment procedure, the restorative
material utilized, and the operator's skill, as well as patient factors such as oral hygiene, occlusion, and adverse
habits. Since all direct esthetic restorations are bonded to
tooth structure, the effectiveness of generating the bond
is paramount for the success and longevity of such
restorations. Failures can result from a number of causes,
including trauma, improper tooth preparation, inferior
materials, and misuse of dental materials. The dentist is
responsible for performing or accomplishing each operative procedure with meticulous care and attention to
detail. However, patient cooperation is of utmost importance in maintaining the clinical appearance and influencing the longevity of any restoration. Long-range clinical success requires that a patient be knowledgeable of
the causes of dental disease and be motivated to practice

preventive measures, including a proper diet, good oral
hygiene, and maintenance recall visits to the dentist.
This chapter primarily presents the properties and clinical
uses of composite materials; they have largely replaced

other types of tooth-colored materials used for esthetic
restorations.
As is noted later, composite restorative materials now
enjoy universal clinical application. They can be used almost anywhere in the mouth for any kind of restorative
procedure. Naturally there are factors that must be considered for each specific application. The reasons for such
expanded usage of these materials relate to improvements in both their ability to bond to tooth structure
(enamel and dentin) and their physical properties. The
possibility of bonding a relatively strong material (composite) to tooth structure (enamel and dentin) results in
a restored tooth that is well sealed and regains much of
its strength .
TYPES OF ESTHETIC RESTORATIVE MATERIALS

A

B
FIG 11-2

A, Many patients do not normally show gingival third
of anterior teeth. B, Patient in A with gold cervical restorations.

FIG 11-3

Many esthetic restorative materials are available. To
gain a full appreciation for available conservative esthetic materials, it is appropriate to review some of the
tooth-colored materials, even though a few of these are
no longer used. (These materials are presented in
greater detail in Chapter 4.)
Fused Porcelain. The fused (baked) porcelain inlay,
an indirect restoration, dates from 1908, when Byram
described several designs of tooth preparations for its
use. Since the development of adhesive resin cements, there has been renewed interest in using fused
porcelain for inlays and onlays in posterior teeth (Fig.
11-3) and veneers in anterior teeth (Fig. 11-4).10,21,40
Many of these restorations are fabricated in a dental
laboratory with materials and equipment similar to that
used for other types of fused porcelain. However, sophisticated computer-aided design/computer-assisted
machining (CAD/CAM) systems are available that also
fabricate porcelain restorations chairside, eliminating
the need for impressions, temporary restorations, laboratory procedures and costs, and additional appointments
(see Chapters 4 and 14).

Porcelain inlay. A, Before. B, After.

CHAPTER

11

Silicate Cement. Silicate cement, the first translucent
filling material, was introduced in 1878 by Fletcher in
England." It was used extensively to restore carious lesions in the anterior teeth for over 60 years. Silicate cement powder is composed of acid-soluble glasses, and
the liquid contains phosphoric acid, water, and buffering agents. Although silicate cement is rarely used as a
restorative material today, a practitioner still may encounter silicate restorations, especially in older patients.
Silicate cement was recommended for small restorations in the anterior teeth of patients with high caries activity." By virtue of the high fluoride content and solubility of this restorative material, the adjacent enamel
was thought to be rendered more resistant to recurrent
caries. Tooth preparations for silicate cement were of the
conventional type (boxlike form), and a butt joint was
required at the cavosurface margin because the material
was brittle and had poor edge strength. Mechanical retention was necessary in the tooth preparation because
the material did not adhere to the tooth structure. A
liner or base was required under the silicate cement to
protect the pulp tissue from irritation due to the initial
low pH of the material.

FIG . 11-4

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

Tooth-matching ability, ease of manipulation, and an
anticariogenic quality were favorable characteristics of
silicate cement. It was also a good insulator, and its coefficient of thermal expansion approached that of enamel.
Even though the average life of a silicate cement restoration was approximately 4 years some of these restorations have been reported to last for 10 years and longer
in some patients.
Failures of silicate cement are easy to detect because
of their discoloration and loss of contour (Fig. 11-5).
When examined with an explorer tip, silicate cement is
rough and has the feel of ground glass. Old composite
restorations may also exhibit a similar surface texture
and discoloration (Fig. 11-6), but they are less subject to
extensive ditching or loss of contour.
Acrylic Resin. Self-curing (chemically activated)
acrylic resin for anterior restorations was developed in
Germany in the 1930s, but it was not marketed until the
late 1940s because of World War II. Early acrylic materials were disappointing because of inherent weaknesses such as poor activator systems, high polymerization shrinkage, high coefficient of thermal expansion,
and lack of abrasion resistance, resulting in marginal

Porcelain veneers. A, Before. B, After.

FIG 11-5 Failed silicate cement restorations displaying discoloration and loss of contour.

F I G 11-6 Typical appearance of an old, extrinsically stained,
and rough composite restoration.

CHAPTER

11

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

leakage, pulp injury, recurrent caries, color changes, and
excessive wear . 38,44 I mprovements in these materials and
their procedures reduced the severity and occurrence of
some of these problems. Acrylic resin restorations are
rarely used today, but, as with silicate cement restorations, may be seen in older patients.
The tooth preparation for acrylic resin usually was either the conventional type or beveled conventional type
(described later for composites). As a restoration, acrylic
resin was most successful in protected areas of teeth
where temperature change, abrasion, and stress were
minimal." It was also used as an esthetic veneer on the
facial surface of Class 11 and Class IV metal restorations
and for facings in crowns and bridges. One of the current uses of acrylic resin is for making temporary restorations in operative and fixed prosthodontic indirect
restoration procedures requiring two or more appointments. Satisfactory temporary restorations that are esthetic, comfortable, and adequately wear resistant can
be made quickly with acrylic resin. Instructions for mixing acrylic resin must be followed carefully. When the
powder and liquid are mixed, polymerization occurs at
a rapid rate, resulting in some shrinkage and a slight
rise in temperature as the material hardens.
As stated previously, several unfavorable physical
properties prevented acrylic resin from being an ideal
restorative material. Because of poor wear resistance, it
would not maintain its contour in areas subject to abrasion or attrition. It was not indicated for high-stress areas
because the material had low strength and would flow
under load. Its high polymerization shrinkage and linear
coefficient of thermal expansion caused microleakage
and eventual discoloration at the margins as a result of
percolation (Fig. 11-7). 38 This problem could be somewhat overcome by providing adequate internal retention

FIG 11-7 Acrylic resin restoration displaying marginal discoloration after several years of service.

form in the tooth preparation, acid-etching the enamel,
and inserting the material with a nonpressure technique.
The clinical appearance of an acrylic resin restoration
is usually smooth and polished. When tested with an
explorer tip, the material is relatively soft when compared to enamel. After a few years, a thin brown line
may develop around the restoration, indicating microleakage (see Fig. 11-7). However, such discoloration of
properly inserted restorations does not necessarily indicate recurrent caries and can be eliminated easily by a
small-repair veneer restoration.
Composite. In an effort to improve the physical characteristics of unfilled acrylic resins, Bowen of the National Bureau of Standards (now called the National Institute of Standards Technology) developed a polymeric
dental restorative material reinforced with silica particles.'," The introduction of this filled resin material in
1962 became the basis for the restorations that are generically termed composites.
Composites are presently the most popular toothcolored materials, having completely replaced silicate
cement and acrylic resin. Basically, composite restorative
materials consist of a continuous polymeric or resin matrix in which an inorganic filler is dispersed. This inorganic filler phase significantly enhances the physical
properties of the composite (as compared to previous
tooth-colored materials) by increasing the strength of the
restorative material and reducing the linear coefficient
of thermal expansion .6 Composites possess linear coefficients of thermal expansion that are one half to one third
the value typically found for unfilled acrylic resins and
therefore nearer to that of tooth structure. (See Chapter 4
for details on composite components and properties.)
For a composite to have good mechanical properties,
a strong bond must exist between the organic resin matrix and the inorganic filler. This bond is achieved by
coating the filler particles with a silane coupling agent, 15
which not only increases the strength of the composite
but also reduces its solubility and water absorption . 6
Composites are usually divided into three types based
primarily on the size, amount, and composition of the
inorganic filler: (1) conventional composites, (2) microfill composites, and (3) hybrid composites. However,
more recent changes in composite composition have resulted in several other hybrid type categories, including
flowable and packable composites.
Conventional Composites. Conventional composites
generally contain approximately 75% to 80% inorganic
filler by weight. The average particle size of conventional
composites in the 1980s was approximately 8 um. Because of the relatively large size and extreme hardness
of the filler particles, conventional composites typically
exhibit a rough surface texture. (This characteristic can
be clearly seen in the scanning electron micrograph in
Fig. 11-8.) The resin matrix wears at a faster rate than the
filler particles, further roughening the surface. Unfortu-

CHAPTER

11

nately this type of surface texture causes the restoration
to be more susceptible to discoloration from extrinsic
staining (see Fig. 11-6). Conventional composites have a
higher amount of initial wear at occlusal contact areas
than do the microfill or hybrid types.
The composition of the inorganic filler in conventional
composites also affects the degree of surface roughness.
A "soft" or "friable" glass such as strontium or barium
yields a smoother surface than those with a quartz filler.
Also, when strontium or barium glasses are incorporated in sufficient amounts, the composite is made radiopaque. This is an important characteristic because
caries around or under a composite restoration can be
more easily interpreted when viewing a radiograph. It
should be noted that most conventional composites currently have been supplanted by hybrid composites (see
Hybrid Composites).
Microfill Composites. In the late 1970s the microfill,
or "polishable," composites were introduced. These materials were designed to replace the rough surface characteristic of conventional composites with a smooth,
lustrous surface similar to tooth enamel. Instead of containing the large filler particles typical of the conventional composites, the microfill composites contain colloidal silica particles whose average diameter ranges
from 0.01 to 0.04)um. As illustrated in the scanning electron micrograph in Fig. 11-9, this small particle size results in a smooth, polished surface in the finished restoration that is less receptive to plaque or extrinsic staining.
However, because of the greater surface area per unit
volume of these microfine particles, the microfill composites cannot be as heavily filled.'-' Typically, microfill
composites have an inorganic filler content of approximately 35% to 60% by weight. Because these materials
contain considerably less filler than do conventional or

Scanning electron micrograph of polished surface of
a conventional composite (x300).
FIG. 11-8

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

hybrid composites, some of their physical and mechanical characteristics are somewhat inferior. Nonetheless,
microfill composites are clinically very wear resistant.
Also, their low modulus of elasticity may allow microfill
composite restorations to flex during tooth flexure, thus
better protecting the bonding interface. This feature may
not have any effect on material selection for Class V
restorations in general, but it may make microfill composites an appropriate choice for restoring Class V cervical lesions or defects where cervical flexure can be significant (e.g., bruxism, clenchers, stressful occlusion).
Hybrid Composites. In an effort to combine the favorable physical and mechanical properties characteristic of conventional composites with the smooth surface
typical of the microfill composites, the hybrid composites were developed. These materials generally have an
inorganic filler content of approximately 75% to 85% by
weight. The filler is typically a mixture of microfiller
and small filler particles that results in a considerably
smaller average particle size (0.4 to 1 um) than that of
conventional composites. Because of the relatively high
content of inorganic fillers, the physical and mechanical
characteristics are generally superior to those of conventional composites. Also, the presence of sub-micrometersized microfiller particles interspersed among the larger
particles provides a smooth "patina-like" surface texture in the finished restoration. Hybrid composites currently are the predominant direct esthetic restorative
materials used. They have almost universal clinical applicability and are the primary materials referred to as
composites throughout this book.
Flowable Composites. Flowable composites have
lower filler content and consequently inferior physical
properties, such as lower wear resistance and strength,
when compared to more heavily filled composites. Even

fIG

11-9 Scanning electron micrograph of polished surface of
a microfill composite (x300).

CHAPTER

11

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

though manufacturers promote widespread usage of
these products, they appear to be more appropriate for
use in some small Class I restorations, as pit-and-fissure
sealants, as marginal repair materials, or, more infrequently, as the first increment placed as a liner under
hybrid or packable composites. While their ease of use,
favorable wettability, and handling properties are popular features, clinical indications for their use are limited.
Packable Composites. Packable composites are designed to be inherently more viscous to afford a "feel"
upon insertion, similar to that of amalgam. Because of increased viscosity and resistance to packing, some lateral
displacement of the matrix band is possible. Currently
there are no long-term clinical studies to equate packable
composites' promoted benefits with improved clinical
results when compared to hybrid composites. Their development is an attempt to accomplish two goals: (1) easier restoration of a proximal contact, and (2) similarity to
the handling properties of amalgam. They do not completely accomplish either.
Glass lonomer
Conventional Glass lonomers. Glass ionomers
were developed first by Wilson and Kent in 1972. 5' Like
their predecessors, silicate cements, the original glassionomer restorative materials were powder/liquid systems. Glass ionomers enjoy the same favorable characteristics of silicate cements-they release fluoride into
the surrounding tooth structure, yielding a potential
anticariogenic effect, and possess a favorable coefficient
of thermal expansion .37,50 Unlike the silicate cements
that have a phosphoric acid liquid, glass ionomers use
polyacrylic acid, which renders the final restorative material less soluble.
Although conventional glass ionomers are relatively
technique-sensitive regarding mixing and insertion procedures, they may be good materials for restoration of
root-surface caries because of their inherent potential
anticariogenic quality and adhesion to dentin. Similarly,
glass ionomers may be indicated for other anterior restorations in patients exhibiting high caries activity. Because of their low resistance to wear and relatively low
strength when compared to composite or amalgam, glass
ionomers are not recommended for the restoration of
occlusal areas of posterior teeth. Glass-ionomer cements
also have been widely advocated for permanent cementation of crowns.
Like other cements, conventional glass-ionomer systems require hand mixing of a powder and liquid with
Tooth-Colored Materials

a spatula. However, some glass ionomers are available
in encapsulated forms that are mixed by trituration. The
capsule containing the mixed material is subsequently
placed in an injection syringe for easy insertion into the
tooth preparation.
While fluoride-releasing materials have received much
publicity and been very popular, one systematic review
of numerous research articles on glass ionomers concluded that there was "no conclusive evidence for or
against a treatment effect of inhibition of secondary
caries by the glass ionomer restorations.
Resin-Modified Glass lonomers. In an effort to improve the physical properties and esthetic qualities of
conventional glass ionomer cements, resin-modified
glass ionomer (RMGI) materials have been developed
(Table 11-1). RMGIs are probably best described as glass
ionomers to which resin has been added. An acid-base
setting reaction is present, similar to that of conventional glass-ionomer cements. This is the primary feature that distinguishes these materials from compomers
(see the next section). Additionally, the resin component
affords the potential for light-curing, auto-curing, or
both. RMGIs are easier to use and possess better
strength, wear resistance, and esthetics than conventional glass ionomers. However, their physical properties are generally inferior to those of composites, and
their indications for clinical use are limited. Because
they have the potential advantage of sustained fluoride
release, they may be best indicated for Class V restorations in adults who are at high risk for caries and for
Classes I and II restorations in primary teeth that will
not require long-term service.
Compomers (Polyacid-Modified Composites). Compomers are probably best described as composites to
which some glass-ionomer components have been
added. Primarily light-cured, they are very easy to use
and have gained popularity because of their superb handling properties. Overall, their physical properties are
superior to traditional glass ionomers and RMGIs but inferior to those of composites. Their indications for clinical use, therefore, are limited. Although compomers are
capable of releasing fluoride, the release is not sustained
at a constant rate and anticariogenicity is questionable.
I MPORTANT PROPERTIES

There are considerations regarding various properties of
composites that must be understood if a successful composite restoration is to be done. These properties gener-

CHAPTER

11

ally require that specific techniques be incorporated into
the restorative procedure, either in the tooth preparation
or the application of the material. The various property
factors are presented here, with additional information
provided primarily in Chapter 4 but also in Chapters 12,
13,14,and15.
Linear Coefficient of Thermal Expansion. The linear
coefficient of thermal expansion (LCTE) is the rate of dimensional change of a material per unit change in temperature. The closer the LCTE of the material is to the
LCTE of enamel, the less chance there is for creating
voids or openings at the junction of the material and the
tooth when temperature changes occur. The LCTE of
improved composites is approximately three times that
of tooth structure; that for hybrid glass ionomer is 1.5
to 2 times that of tooth structure. Bonding a composite
to etched tooth structure reduces the potential negative
effects due to the difference between the LCTE of tooth
structure and that of the material.
Water Absorption. Water absorption is the amount
of water that a material absorbs over time per unit of
surface area or volume. When a restorative material absorbs water, its properties change, and therefore its effectiveness as a restorative material is usually diminished.
All of the available tooth-colored materials exhibit some
water absorption. Materials with higher filler contents
exhibit lower water absorption values.
Wear Resistance. Wear resistance refers to a material's ability to resist surface loss as a result of abrasive contact with opposing tooth structure, restorative
material, food boli, and such items as toothbrush bristles and toothpicks. The filler particle size, shape, and
content affect the potential wear of composites and
other tooth-colored restorative materials. The location
of the restoration in the dental arch and occlusal contact relationships also affect the potential wear of these
materials.
Wear resistance of composite materials is generally
good. While not yet as resistant as amalgam, the difference is becoming smaller. 12,34 A composite restoration offers stable occlusal relationship potential in most clinical conditions, particularly if the occlusal contacts are
shared with those on natural tooth structure.
SurfaceTexture. Surface texture is the smoothness of
the surface of the restorative material. Restorations in
close approximation to gingival tissues require surface
smoothness for optimal gingival health. The size and
composition of the filler particles primarily determine
the smoothness of a restoration, as does the material's
ability to be finished and polished. While microfill composites offer the smoothest restorative surface, hybrid
composites also provide surface textures that are both
esthetic and compatible with soft tissues.
Radiopacity. Esthetic restorative materials must be
sufficiently radiopaque, so that the radiolucent image of
recurrent caries around or under a restoration can be
more easily seen in a radiograph. Most composites con-

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

tain radiopaque fillers, such as barium glass, to make
the material radiopaque.
Modulus of Elasticity. Modulus of elasticity is the
stiffness of a material. A material having a higher modulus is more rigid; conversely, a material with a lower
modulus is more flexible. A microfill composite material
with greater flexibility may perform better in certain
Class V restorations than a more rigid hybrid composite. This is particularly true for Class V restorations in
teeth experiencing heavy occlusal forces, where stress
concentrations exist in the cervical area. Such stress can
cause tooth flexure that can disrupt the bonding interface. 30 Using a more flexible material such as a microfill
composite allows the restorations to bend with the tooth,
thereby better protecting the bonding interface. However, as noted, the elastic modulus of the material may
be less significant with current bonding systems unless
significant occlusal stress from bruxism, clenching, or
other forms of stressful occlusion is present. Stressbreaking liners that possess a lower elastic modulus also
can be used to better protect the bonding interface.
Solubility. Solubility is the loss in weight per unit
surface area or volume due to dissolution or disintegration of a material in oral fluids, over time, at a given
temperature. Composite materials do not demonstrate
any clinically relevant solubility.
POLYMERIZATION OF COMPOSITE
Polymerization Shrinkage. Composite materials
shrink while hardening. This is referred to as polymerization shrinkage. This phenomenon cannot be avoided,
and there are important clinical procedural techniques
that must be incorporated to help offset the potential
problems associated with a material pulling away from
the preparation walls as it hardens. Careful control of
the amount and insertion point of the material and appropriate placement of etchant, primer, and adhesive on
the prepared tooth structure to improve bonding reduces these problems.
Polymerization shrinkage usually does not cause significant problems with restorations cured in preparations having all-enamel margins. However, when a tooth
preparation has extended onto the root surface, polymerization shrinkage can (and usually does) cause a gap
formation at the junction of the composite and root surface.
This problem can be minimized with appropriate technique but probably not eliminated. The clinical
significance of the gap is not fully known. The V-shaped
gap occurs because the force of polymerization of the
composite is greater than the initial bond strength of the
composite to the dentin of the root. The V-shaped gap is
probably composed of composite on the restoration side
and hybridized dentin on the root side (Fig. 11-10).
An important clinical consideration regarding the
effects of polymerization shrinkage is the configuration factor (C-factor). The C-factor is the ratio of bonded
surfaces to the unbonded, or free, surfaces in a tooth

CHAPTER

11

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

B

A

FIG Contraction gap. A, V-shaped gap on root surface. B, Restoration-side vector is composite; root-side vector is hybridized dentin.

preparation. The higher the C-factor, the greater is the
potential for bond disruption from polymerization effects. For example, a Class IV restoration (one bonded
surface and four unbonded surfaces) with a C-factor of
0.25 is at low risk for adverse polymerization shrinkage
effects. However, a Class I restoration with a C-factor of
five (five bonded surfaces, one unbonded surface) is at
much higher risk of bond disruption associated with
polymerization shrinkage, particularly along the pulpal
floor 20,58 (Fig. 11-11).
Internal stresses can be reduced in restorations subject to potentially high disruptive contraction forces
(e.g., Class I preparations with a high C-factor) by using: (1) "soft-start" polymerization instead of high-intensity light-curing, (2) incremental additions to reduce the effects of polymerization shrinkage, and (3) a
stress-breaking liner, such as a filled dentinal adhesive
or RMGI.
Method of Polymerization.
The method of polymerization of a composite may affect the technique of
insertion, direction of polymerization shrinkage, finishing procedure, color stability, and amount of internal
porosity in the material. There are two polymerization
methods: self-cured and light-cured using visible light.
Self-cured materials require mixing two components, a
catalyst and a base, which then react to cause the material to polymerize. Since the components are mixed,
there is greater chance for air inclusion in the mixture
and therefore greater internal porosity. Also, the working time to insert the self-cured material is restricted by
the speed of chemical reaction and can result in the
need for increased finishing time because limited contouring can be done before setting occurs. The color
stability of self-cured materials also is less stable because of the eventual breakdown of the polymerizationinitiating chemical ingredients, tertiary amines. Direction
of polymerization shrinkage for self-cured materials is
generally centralized (towards the center of the mass). It
is theorized that this may help maintain marginal adaptation to prevent microleakage.

Light-cured materials require the use of curing light
units or generators. The use of light sources may cause
retinal damage unless appropriate precautions are taken
to avoid direct, prolonged exposure to the light source.
However, light-cured materials do provide increased
working time during insertion of the material and therefore require less finishing time. They also exhibit greater
color stability and less internal porosity. Effects of polymerization shrinkage can be partially compensated for
by an incremental insertion (and curing) technique.
However, there are also some clinical situations where
positioning the light source close enough to the material
is difficult or compromised. In spite of these disadvantages, almost all contemporary composites are of the
light-cured type.
Interest continues in improving light-curing methods.
In addition to the most common quartz/ tungsten/
halogen light-curing systems, plasma arc curing (PAC)
and argon laser curing (Laser) systems are available for
rapid polymerization of light-cured materials. The latter
two systems provide high-intensity and high-speed curing when compared to the quartz/tungsten/halogen
systems. However, they also significantly increase heat
generation and polymerization shrinkage stresses and
exhibit a narrow spectral output that may or may not
coincide with the spectral requirements needed to cure
the restorative material. Whether or not long-term
clinical benefits will be identified for these systems is
unknown.
In an effort to reduce polymerization shrinkage stresses,
different curing mechanism are becoming available, primarily in quartz/tungsten/halogen light-curing units,
with the intent of offering a slow or "soft-start" polymerization (see Chapter 4). Also, new light-curing systems
using blue light-emitting diodes (LEDs) are being developed that are more efficient, cooler, more portable,
and more durable than the systems noted previously.
All of these efforts are to develop a light-curing system that is consistent and faster and produces a stressfree cured material. These features will make light-

CHAPTER

11

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

Contraction
Low Risk

M.11-11 G .11-11 C-factor

Risks

High

Risk

bonded surfaces
unbonded surfaces

FIG 11-12 Acid-etching. A, Enamel rods unetched.
B, Enamel rods etched, creating numerous microundercuts. C, Resin bonding agent engaging microundercuts, creating "resin tags" for mechanical bond
to tooth. D, Composite material chemically bonded to
resin bonding agent.

curing more successful and more economical and possibly result in restorations with better bonding and
properties.

COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS
A composite restoration is placed as follows: (1) the
fault is removed from the tooth, (2) the prepared tooth
structure is acid-etched and primed (if preparation extends into dentin), (3) a fluid resin adhesive material is
bonded to the etched and primed tooth structure, and
(4) a stronger filled restorative material (composite)
is bonded to the resin, contoured, and polished (Fig.
11-12). A successful composite restoration requires careful attention to technique detail, resulting in gaining

the maximum benefit of the material's properties and
appropriate bonding of the material to the tooth (the
main advantage of composite is its ability to bond to
the tooth). The fundamental concepts of adhesion of a
restorative material to tooth structure are presented in
Chapter 5.

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR
COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS
The following sections summarize some general considerations about all composite restorations. Information
for specific clinical applications is presented in Chapters
12, 13, 14, and 15. In selecting a direct restorative material, practitioners usually choose between composite

CHAPTER

11

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

and amalgam. Consequently, some of the following information provides comparative analyses between
those two materials.
I NDICATIONS

Composite can be used for most clinical applications.
Limiting factors for a specific clinical use are identified
in later chapters. Generally, the indications for use are:
1. Classes 1, 11, III, IV, V and VI restorations
2. Foundations or core buildups
3. Sealants and conservative composite restorations
(preventive resin restorations)
4. Esthetic enhancement procedures
• Partial veneers
• Full veneers
• Tooth contour modifications
• Diastema closures
5. Cements (for indirect restorations)
6. Temporary restorations
7. Periodontal splinting
The American Dental Association 2 (ADA) has indicated the appropriateness of composites for use as pitand-fissure sealants, preventive resins, initial Classes I
and II lesions using modified conservative tooth preparations, moderate-sized Classes I and II restorations,
Class V restorations, restorations of esthetically important areas, and restorations in patients allergic or sensitive to metals. The ADA does not support the use of
composites in teeth with heavy occlusal stress, sites that
cannot be isolated, or patients who are allergic or sensitive to composite materials. If composites are used as
indicated, the ADA further states that "when used correctly in the primary and permanent dentition, the expected lifetime of resin-based composites can be comparable to
that of amalgam in Class I, Class II, and Class V restorations."
I solation Factors. For a composite restoration to be
successful (i.e., to restore function, be harmonious with
adjacent tissues, and be retained within the tooth), it
must be appropriately bonded to the tooth structure
(both enamel and dentin). Bonding to tooth structure requires an environment isolated from contamination by
oral fluids or other contaminants; such contamination
prohibits bond development. Therefore the ability to
isolate the operating area (usually by a rubber dam or
cotton rolls) is a major factor in selecting a composite
material for a restoration. If the operating area can be
isolated, a bonding procedure can be successfully done.
This would include the use of a composite, a bonded
amalgam, or a glass-ionomer restoration, as well as the
bonding of an indirect restoration with an appropriate
cementing agent. If the operating area cannot be totally
protected from contamination, a nonbonded amalgam
restoration may be the material of choice, because the
presence of some oral fluids may not cause significant
clinical problems with amalgam.

Occlusal Factors. Composite materials exhibit less
wear resistance than amalgam; however, studies indicate
that with contemporary composites, the wear resistance
is not substantially different from that of amalgam .
For patients with either heavy occlusion, bruxism, or
restorations that provide all of a tooth's occlusal contacts,
amalgam, rather than composite, is usually the material
of choice. Nevertheless, for most teeth experiencing normal occlusal loading and having occlusal contacts that
are at least shared with tooth structure, composite restorations perform well. Factors that affect the wear resistance of a composite restoration include tooth location,
width of the tooth preparation, and the type of contact
from the opponent tooth on the composite surface.
Operator Ability and Commitment Factors. The
tooth preparation for a composite restoration is relatively easy and less complex than that for an amalgam.
However, tooth isolation; placement of etchant, primer,
and adhesive on the tooth structure; and insertion, finishing, and polishing of the composite are more difficult
than for an amalgam restoration. The operator must pay

greater attention to detail to successfully accomplish a composite restoration. This requires both technical ability and

knowledge of the material's use and limitations.
CONTRAINDICATIONS

The primary contraindications for use of composite as
a restorative material relate to the factors presented in
the preceding section-isolation, occlusion, and operator factors. If the operating site cannot be isolated from
contamination by oral fluids, composite (or any other
bonded material) should not be used. If all of the occlusion will be on the restorative material, composite may
again not be the choice for use. However, both the need
to strengthen remaining weakened unprepared tooth
structure with an economical procedure (as compared
to an indirect restoration) and the commitment to recall
the patient routinely and in a timely manner may override any concern about excessive wear potential. Also,
as discussed previously, composite restoration extensions on the root surface may exhibit gap formation at
the junction of the composite and root. The long-term
clinical effect of the gap is unknown. Any restoration
that extends onto the root surface may result in less
than ideal marginal integrity. For example, an amalgam
exhibits a slight space at the margin until corrosion
products better seal the area. Lastly, as stated previously, the operator must be committed to pursing those
procedures, such as tooth isolation, which make bonded
restorations successful. These additional procedures
admittedly may make the procedures associated with
successful bonded restorations more difficult and time
consuming.
ADVANTAGES

Some advantages of composite restorations have already been stated, but the following list portrays the

CHAPTER

11

reasons composite restorations have become so popular,
especially in comparison to nonbonded amalgam restorations. Composite restorations are:
1. Esthetic
2. Conservative of tooth structure removal (less extension; uniform depth not necessary; mechanical retention usually not necessary)
3. Less complex when preparing the tooth
4. Insulative, having low thermal conductivity
5. Used almost universally
6. Bonded to tooth structure, resulting in good retention, low microleakage, minimal interfacial staining,
and increased strength of remaining tooth structure
7. Repairable

DISADVANTAGES
The primary disadvantages of composite restorations
relate to potential gap formation and procedural difficulties. Following is a list of these and other disadvantages of composite restorations. Composite restorations:
1. May have a gap formation, usually occurring on root
surfaces as a result of the forces of polymerization
shrinkage of the composite material being greater
than the initial early bond strength of the material to
dentin
2. Are more difficult, time-consuming, and costly (compared to amalgam restorations) because:
• Tooth treatment usually requires multiple steps.
• Insertion is more difficult.
• Establishing proximal contacts, axial contours,
embrasures, and occlusal contacts may be more
difficult.
• Finishing and polishing procedures are more
difficult.
3. Are more technique sensitive because the operating
site must be appropriately isolated and the placement of etchant, primer, and adhesive on the tooth
structure (enamel and dentin) is very demanding of
proper technique
4. May exhibit greater occlusal wear in areas of high occlusal_ stress or when all of the tooth's occlusal contacts are on the composite material
5. Have a higher linear coefficient of thermal expansion, resulting in potential marginal percolation if an
inadequate bonding technique is utilized

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

Local Anesthesia. Local anesthesia may be required
for many operative procedures, as cited in Chapter 10.
Profound anesthesia contributes to a more pleasant and
uninterrupted procedure and usually results in a marked
reduction in salivation. These effects of local anesthesia
contribute to better operative dentistry, especially when
placing bonded restorations.
Preparation of the Operating Site. If the planned
composite procedure only requires minor or no tooth
preparation, it may be necessary to clean the operating
site with a slurry of pumice to remove plaque, pellicle,
and superficial stains (Fig. 11-13). Calculus removal with
appropriate instruments also may be needed. These
steps create a site more receptive to bonding. Prophy
pastes containing flavoring agents, glycerine, or fluorides act as contaminants and should be avoided to prevent a possible conflict with the acid-etch technique.
Shade Selection. Special attention should be given
to matching the color of the natural tooth with the composite material. The shade of the tooth should be determined before the teeth are subjected to any prolonged
drying, because dehydrated teeth become lighter in
shade as a result of a decrease in translucency.
Normally, teeth are predominantly white, with varying degrees of grey, yellow, or orange tints. The color
also varies with the translucency, thickness, and distribution of enamel and dentin and the age of the patient.
Other factors such as fluorosis, tetracycline staining, and
endodontic treatment also affect tooth color. With so
many variables it is necessary to match the individual
surface of the tooth to be restored. A cross-section of an
anterior tooth (Fig. 11-14) illustrates why there are color
zones. The incisal third (w) (mostly enamel) is lighter
and more translucent than the cervical third (y) (mostly

CLINICAL TECHNIQUE
I NITIAL CLINICAL PROCEDURES
It is necessary that a complete examination, diagnosis,
and treatment plan be finalized before the patient is
scheduled for operative appointments (emergencies excepted). A brief review of the chart (including medical
factors), treatment plan, and radiographs should precede each restorative procedure (see Chapter 9).

FIG 11-13

Cleaning operating site with slurry of flour of pumice.

CHAPTER

11

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

dentin), whereas the middle third (x) is a blend of the
incisal and cervical colors.
Most manufacturers provide shade guides for their
specific materials, which usually are not interchangeable
with materials from other manufacturers. There are variations among the different manufacturers in the number of shades available. It should be noted, however,
that most manufacturers also cross-reference their shades
with those of the VITA Shade Guide (Vitazahnfabrik, Germany), a universally adopted shade guide. Also, most
composite materials are available in enamel and dentin
shades as well as translucent and opaque shades. The
translucency of the composite material selected depends on the translucency of the tooth structure in the
area of the tooth to be restored. Enamel shades are more
translucent and typically are indicated for restoration of
translucent areas such as incisal edges. Because of the
popularity of bleaching, many manufactures also offer
composites in very light shades.
Good lighting, either natural or artificial, is necessary
when the color selection is made. Natural light is preferred for selection of shades. However, if no windows
are present to provide natural daylight, color-corrected
operating lights or ceiling lights are available to facilitate accurate shade selection. If the dental operating
light is used, it should be moved away to decrease the
intensity, thus allowing the effect of shadows to be seen.
In choosing the appropriate shade, hold the entire
shade guide near the teeth to determine general color.
Then select and hold a specific shade tab beside the area
of the tooth to be restored (Fig. 11-15). The shade tab
should be partially covered with the patient's lip or operator's thumb to create the natural effect of shadows.
The cervical area of the tooth is usually darker than the
incisal area. Make the selection as rapidly as possible,
since physiologic limitations of the color receptors in the

eye make it increasingly difficult to distinguish between
similar colors after approximately 30 seconds. If more
time is needed, the eyes should be rested by looking at
a blue or violet object for a few seconds . These are the
complimentary colors of orange and yellow, which are
the predominant colors in teeth. By looking at the complimentary color, the color receptors in the eye are revitalized and resensitized to perceiving minor variations
in yellow and orange. Some dentists request that their
assistants select or assist in shade selection. This practice not only saves time for the dentist, but the assistant,
when adequately trained to select shades, may also feel
a greater sense of responsibility and involvement. Final
shade selection also can be verified by the patient with
the use of a hand mirror.
Most teeth can be matched from manufacturers' basic
shades, although some composites from different manufacturers do not match a VITA Shade Guide the same way.
However, if additional shades are needed, they may be
obtained by mixing two or more of the available shades
together or by adding color modifiers, which may be
available from the manufacturers. Record the shade on
the patient's chart; however, since teeth darken with age,
a different shade or material may be required if a replacement becomes necessary later. It is better to err on
the barely perceptible darker side to allow for this agerelated darkening. If bleaching (whitening) the teeth is
contemplated, it should be done before any restorations
are placed (see Bleaching in Chapter 15).
To be more certain of the proper shade selection, a
small amount of material of the selected shade can be
placed directly on the tooth, in close proximity to the
area to be restored, and cured. This step may provide a
more accurate assessment of the selected shade. If the
shade is correct, an explorer is used to remove the cured
material from the tooth surface. (A more comprehensive

FIG . 11-14

FIG 11-15

Cross-section of anterior tooth showing three color
zones. Incisal third (w) is a lighter shade and more translucent
than gingival third (y), whereas middle third (x) represents
blending of incisal and gingival thirds.

Shade selection. Shade tab is held near the area to
be restored.

CHAPTER 11

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

review of factors affecting the esthetic considerations of
tooth restoration is presented in Chapter 15.)
I solation of the Operating Site. Complete instructions for the control of moisture are given in Chapter 10.
Isolation for tooth-colored restorations can be accomplished with a rubber dam or cotton rolls, with or without a retraction cord. Regardless of the method, isolation of the area is imperative if the desired bond is to be
obtained. Contamination of etched enamel or dentin by
saliva results in a significantly decreased bond, likewise, contamination of the composite material during
insertion results in degradation of physical properties.
Rubber Dam. A heavy rubber dam is an excellent
means of acquiring superb access, vision, and moisture
control. For proximal surface restorations, the dam
should attempt to isolate several teeth mesial and distal to the operating site. This provides adequate access
for tooth preparation, application of the matrix, and insertion and finishing of the material. If a lingual approach is indicated for an anterior tooth restoration, it
is better to isolate all of the anterior teeth and include
the first premolars to provide more access to the lingual
area (Fig. 11-16). For Class V caries and other facial or
lingual defects, it may be necessary to apply a No. 212
retainer (clamp), which may be stabilized with impression compound (Fig. 11-17). Stabilization with compound
may be important to prevent movement of the retainer
and subsequent injury to the tooth and soft tissue.
If a proximal restoration will involve all of the contact
area and/or extend subgingivally, insert a wedge in the
gingival embrasure after dam application and before
tooth preparation. The wedge (1) depresses the interproximal soft tissue, (2) shields the dam and soft tissue
from injury during the operative procedure, and (3) produces separation of the teeth to help compensate for the
matrix thickness. Adequate preoperative wedging assists the eventual proximal contact restoration. Therefore this should occur whether or not a rubber dam is
being used. Usually the wedge is inserted into the larger
embrasure, facial or lingual, but this is at the discretion

of the operator. Before placing the wedge from a facial
approach, stretch the portion of the rubber dam that
covers the interproximal papilla facially and gingivally
(stretch lingually and gingivally if inserting the wedge
from the lingual). Accomplish this by using a fingertip,
first pressing firmly on the dam and underlying soft tissue near the teeth and then pulling the dam as the finger is moved slightly away from the teeth. While holding the dam in this stretched condition (Fig 11-18, A),
begin the insertion of the wedge (see Fig 11-18, B); then,
during the insertion, allow the stretched dam to slowly
slide under the finger back to the normal position (see
Fig. 11-18, C). This procedure helps to prevent catching
the rubber dam (or even piercing it) with the tip of the
wedge and decreases the tension of the stretched dam
under the wedge (which may dislodge the wedge).
(For additional details on isolation by rubber dam, see
Chapter 10.)
Cotton Rolls (With or Without Retraction Cord). An
alternate method of obtaining a dry operating field is
the use of cotton roll isolation. With an experienced and
careful dentist and dental assistant, cotton roll isolation
results in an operating site conducive to accomplishing
a successful composite (or any other) restoration. A cotton roll is placed in the facial vestibule directly adjacent
to the tooth being restored. When restoring a mandibular tooth, a second, preferably larger, cotton roll should
be placed adjacent to the tooth in the lingual vestibule.
Easier placement of the lingual cotton roll is accomplished by holding the mesial end of the large cotton
roll in the beaks of operative pliers and then twisting the
handle of the pliers toward the tooth while using the index finger of the other hand to gently depress the cotton
roll between the mandibular arch and the tongue. This
more easily positions the cotton roll under the lateral
border of the tongue.
When the gingival extension of a tooth preparation is
to be positioned subgingivally, or near the gingiva, a
retraction cord can be used to both temporarily retract
the tissue and reduce seepage of tissue fluids into the

FIG 11-16 Isolating anterior teeth with rubber dam. More access is provided for lingual instrumentation if premolars are
i ncluded. Still more access may be provided by placing retainers over rubber dam and premolars.

FIG 11-17 I solation of Class V preparation with rubber dam and
No. 212 clamp. Impression compound stabilizes the retainer.

CHAPTER11

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

FIG 11-18 Using triangular wood wedge to expose gingival margin of large proximal preparation.
A, Dam is stretched facially and gingivally with fingertip. B, Insertion of wedge (dam is released
during wedge insertion). C, Wedge in place.

operating site. If hemorrhage control is needed, the cord
can first be saturated with a liquid astringent material.
Tissue retraction in Class V areas using a small-diameter cord is not difficult if properly done. A piece of cord
approximately 0.5 to 1 mm in diameter (cords are usually available in various dimensions) and 8 to 10 mm
long is usually sufficient, depending on the dimension of
the involved gingival crevice. As noted, for controlling
bleeding, the cord may be moistened with a small amount
of astringent, such as Hemodent (Premier Dental Products Company, Norristown, Pennsylvania). A simple way
to moisten the cord is to dip the closed beaks of sterilized cotton pliers (not the cord itself) into the bottle to
pick up a small amount of liquid, then touch the cord
with the tip of the beaks to transfer the liquid. Some operators prefer to place the cord in a dappen dish, wet it
with a drop of Hemodent, and then blot it with a 2 x 2
inch (5 x 5 cm) gauze to remove excess liquid. Next, the
cord may need to be twisted to distribute the liquid and
make the cord more compact. However, many available
cords are braided and do not require twisting. Now the
cord may be tucked into the gingival crevice with the
side of a No. 2 explorer, the end of an FP3 plastic instrument, or another suitable instrument, starting interproximally at one end of the cord (Fig. 11-19, A). Continue cord placement along the gingival margin (see Fig.
11-19, B) and slightly beyond the opposite extent of the
proposed tooth preparation outline (see Fig. 11-19, C). If
difficulty is encountered during placement, a "holding"
instrument such as a periodontal probe or the blade of a
suitable plastic instrument may be used to keep the submerged portion of the cord in the crevice during placement of the free end (see Fig. 11-19, D). As the tucking
or packing procedure is continued, it may be necessary
to follow with the holding instrument in a steplike manner. A slight backward vector to the insertion direction
also helps keep the previously inserted cord in place.
When additional tissue displacement is needed, a second cord may be placed on top of the first in the same
manner. Remember that the cord is always inserted into
the crevice and not on top of the gingiva. Any retraction
cord placement must be done judiciously to avoid blunt

dissection of the gingival tissue or periodontal attachment. Also, do not overpack to cause ischemia of the
gingiva (seen as blanching), which may result in tissue
damage and recession. Gently insert the cord (with astringent) and in a few minutes the marginal gingiva will
move laterally and apically approximately 0.5 mm away
from the tooth preparation area. Do not leave any loose
strands of the cord exposed, which may result in the
cord catching a cutting instrument and being dislodged.
Occasionally observe the displaced and retracted tissue
during subsequent procedures to ascertain that tissue
damage is not occurring.
Other Preoperative Considerations. When restoring posterior proximal surfaces, a preoperative wedge
should be placed firmly into the gingival embrasure. This
causes separation of the operated tooth from the adjacent tooth and creates some space to compensate for the
matrix thickness that will be used later in the procedure.
Preoperative wedging assists in reestablishing a proximal contact with a composite restoration. A complement
for prewedging is the use of special matrices (Fig. 11-20).
Also, a preoperative assessment of the occlusion
should be made. This should occur before rubber dam
placement and should identify not only the occlusal
contacts of the tooth or teeth to be restored, but also the
occlusal contacts on adjacent teeth. Knowing the preoperative location of occlusal contacts is important both in
planning the restoration outline form and establishing
the proper occlusal contact(s) on the restoration. Remembering where contacts are located on adjacent teeth
provides guidance in knowing when the restoration
contacts are correctly adjusted.

TOOTH PREPARATION FOR
COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS
Detailed descriptions of specific composite tooth preparations are presented in Chapters 6, 12, 13, and 15. As
discussed in Chapter 6, the stages and steps of tooth
preparation are appropriate for composite restorations
and amalgam restorations, even though there may be
some major differences. Basically, the tooth preparation
for a composite restoration includes:

CHAPTER 11

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

FIG 11-19 Isolating Class V preparation with cotton roll and treated cord. A, One end of cord is
tucked into gingival crevice with side of No. 2 explorer. B, Procedure is continued. C, Cord in
place. D, Two instruments may be used to place cord in difficult cases. No. 2 explorer used to
tuck, while small, blunt instrument used to hold cord in place.

FIG 11-20 New composite matrix systems. A, Contact matrix (Danville Materials). B, ComposiTight Matrix System (Garrison Dental Solutions, Spring Lake, Michigan).

1. Removing the fault, defect, old material, or friable
tooth structure
2. Creating prepared enamel margins of 90 degrees or
greater (greater than 90 degrees usually preferable)
3. Creating 90-degree (or butt joint) cavosurface margins on root surfaces
4. Roughening the prepared tooth structure (enamel
and dentin) with a diamond stone
These objectives can be met by producing a tooth
preparation form significantly different from that for an
amalgam restoration. Differences include:
1. Less outline extension (adjacent suspicious or at-risk
areas [grooves or pits] may be "sealed" rather than
restored)
2. An axial and/or pulpal wall of varying depth (not
uniform)

3. Incorporation of an enamel bevel at some areas (the
width of which is dictated by the need for secondary
retention)
4. Tooth preparation walls being rough (to increase the
surface area for bonding)
5. Use of a diamond stone (to increase the roughness of
the tooth preparation walls)
The basic principles of tooth preparation must be followed for composite restorations. The tooth preparation
should include removing (outline form) all of the caries,
fault, defect, or old restorative material (when necessary) in the most conservative manner possible. The
composite material must be retained within the tooth
(retention form), but this primarily results from the micromechanical bonding of the composite to the roughened, etched, and primed enamel and dentin. In some
instances, a dentinal retention groove or enamel bevel

CHAPTER 11

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

may be prepared to enhance the retention form. Resistance form, which keeps the tooth strong and protects it
from fracture, is primarily accomplished by the strength
of the micromechanical bond but may be increased,
when necessary, by usual resistance form features such
as flat preparation floors, boxlike forms, and floors prepared perpendicular to the occlusal forces. While the
caries removal technique is the same as that presented in
Chapter 6, pulp protection procedures are different for a
composite restoration. Because the composite is bonded
to the prepared tooth and the composite material is insulative, there is no need for any bases under composite
restorations. However, a calcium hydroxide liner is still
indicated when a pulpal exposure (or possible pulpal
exposure) occurs.
Types of Composite Tooth Preparations. Tooth
preparations for composite materials should be as conservative as possible. The extent of the preparation is
usually determined by the size, shape, and location of
the defect and whatever extensions are necessary to provide access for vision and instrumentation. Acid-etch
techniques, effective bonding systems, and improved
composites have significantly affected tooth preparation
and expanded the ability to restore teeth.
The design of the tooth preparation to receive a composite restoration may vary depending on several factors. Five designs of tooth preparations for composite
restorations are presented here, and sometimes they will
be used in combination. The designs include: (1) conventional, (2) beveled conventional, (3) modified, (4) boxonly, and (5) slot preparation designs. A discussion of
general characteristics for each follows, with more detail
in subsequent chapters.

Conventional. Conventional tooth preparations are
those typical for amalgam restorations (as described in
Chapters 16 to 19). Outline form is the necessary extension of external walls at an initial, limited, uniform dentinal depth, resulting in the formation of those walls in
a butt joint junction (90 degrees) with the restorative
material. In amalgam conventional tooth preparations,
the butt joint marginal configuration and the retention
grooves and coves in dentin are distinguishing features.
These preparation designs were used extensively in the
past for both amalgam and composite restorations and
may be encountered when restoration replacement is indicated. It should be noted that the previous use of the
conventional preparation for composites was not restricted to the root surface only. Fig. 11-21 illustrates
models of old conventional tooth preparation designs
for Classes 111, IV, and V composite preparations.
The primary indications for conventional tooth preparation
in composite restorations are: (1) preparations located on root
surfaces (nonenamel areas) and (2) moderate to large Class I
or Class II restorations. In the root areas, the butt joint de-

sign provides a better preparation configuration into
which the groove and/or cove retention form can be
placed, if deemed necessary (Fig. 11-22). This design facilitates a better seal between the composite and the
dentin or cementum surfaces and enhances retention of
the composite material in the tooth.
In moderate to large Class I or Class II composite
restorations, there may be increased need for resistance
form, which the conventional amalgamlike preparation
design provides. An inverted cone diamond (similar in
shape to a No. 245 bur) is used to prepare the tooth, resulting in a preparation design similar to that for amal-

Old conventional preparation designs for Class III (A), Class IV (B), and Class V (C) restorations. Butt joint marginal configuration and retention grooves in dentin characterized this
preparation design. Currently this preparation design is used for root- surface restorations and
l arge Class I and Class 11 restorations.

FIG11-21

CHAPTER 11

gam, but usually smaller in width and extensions and
without prepared secondary retention form. The inverted cone diamond not only leaves the prepared tooth
structure roughened, but also is conservative of the occlusal faciolingual extension. The butt joint marginal
configuration between the tooth and the composite is not
required (as it would be for amalgam). Thus the cavosurface angle in areas on the preparation periphery can
be more flared (obtuse) than 90 degrees. The occlusal
cavosurface angle is obtuse, yet provides for occlusally
converging walls (Fig. 11-23).
Because of the similarity of the Class I or Class II conventional composite preparation to an amalgam tooth
preparation, many operators prefer its use whether the
Class I or Class II preparation is for a large posterior
composite or for restoring a new, smaller carious lesion.
It should be noted, however, that conservation of tooth
structure is of paramount importance. Class I or Class II
conventional composite preparations should be prepared with as little faciolingual extension as possible
and should not routinely be extended into all pits and
fissures on the occlusal surface where sealants may be
otherwise indicated. Likewise, it should be remembered
that the boxlike form increases the negative effects of
the C-factor.
It is usually advantageous to use a diamond stone for
preparing the tooth for a composite restoration. This results in a roughened prepared surface, which increases

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

the surface area for bonding. Retention and marginal seal
also are improved by beveling some enamel margins.
Beveling increases favorable end-on etching of enamel
prisms and increases the surface area for bonding. Because round diamonds or burs are typically used for
Class III and Class IV preparations, a beveled or flared
cavosurface margin results, and therefore few conventional preparation designs will occur for most anterior
composite restorations of this type.
Beveled Conventional. Beveled conventional tooth
preparations are similar to conventional preparations in
that the outline form has external boxlike walls, but
with some beveled enamel margins. The preparation
also may be accomplished with a diamond stone. The
principles of conventional outline form with the limited
initial depth of the axial and pulpal walls are followed.
The beveled conventional preparation design typically is indicated when a composite restoration is being used to replace an
existing restoration (usually amalgam) exhibiting a conventional tooth preparation design with enamel margins or to
restore a large area. This design is most typical for Classes

III, IV, and V restorations. Usually all of the old material
is removed, thereby providing increased bonding potential, not only to enamel but also to dentin. Sometimes
the old restorative material may be only partially removed if the remaining material is judged acceptable
(radiographically negative for caries, with symptomless
tooth pulp). However, leaving old amalgam material

Beveled or flared
enamel margin
Retention groove

f I G 11-22 A and B, Combination preparation design for a Class III that extends
onto root-surface. The root-surface portion is a conventional preparation design, utilizing butt joint marginal configuration and retention groove in dentin.
The coronal portion is a beveled conventional design preparation.

90-degree
root-surface margin

FIG . 11-23 Class II composite conventional tooth preparation.
A, Occlusal view. B, Proximal view.

CHAPTER

11

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

may result in a poor esthetic result because it may show
through the overlying composite material. To facilitate
better marginal sealing and bonding, some accessible
enamel margins may be beveled and then acid-etched.
Fig. 11-24 illustrates beveled conventional preparation
designs for Classes III, IV, and V restorations.
As noted earlier, the advantage of an enamel bevel
for a composite tooth preparation is that the ends of
the enamel rods (exposed by beveling) are more effectively etched than otherwise occurs when only the sides
of the enamel rods are exposed to the acid etchant (Fig.
11-25). Also, the increase in etched surface area results
in a stronger enamel-to-resin bond, which increases retention of the restoration and reduces marginal leakage
and marginal discoloration. Furthermore, incorporation of a cavosurface bevel may enable the restoration to
blend more esthetically with the coloration of the surrounding tooth structure. Even recognizing these advantages, bevels are not usually placed on the occlusal
surfaces of posterior teeth or other areas of potential
heavy contact because a conventional preparation design
already produces end-on etching of the enamel rods by
virtue of the enamel rod direction on occlusal surfaces.
Bevels also are not placed on proximal margins if such
beveling results in excessive extension of the cavosurface margins. Therefore the beveled conventional preparation design is rarely used for posterior composite
restorations.

Modified. Modified tooth preparations for composite
restorations have neither specified wall configurations
nor specified pulpal or axial depths; preferably, they
have enamel margins. Unlike conventional preparations,
modified preparations are not prepared to a uniform
dentinal depth. Both the extension of the margins and
the depth of a modified tooth preparation are dictated
solely by the extent (laterally) and the depth of the carious lesion or other defects. The objectives of this preparation design are to remove the fault as conservatively
as possible and rely on the composite bond to tooth
structure to retain the restoration in the tooth. Modified
tooth preparations conserve more tooth structure because retention is obtained primarily by micromechanical adhesion to the surrounding enamel and underlying
dentin, rather than by preparation of retention grooves
or coves in dentin.
Round burs or diamond stones may be used to prepare this type of preparation, resulting in a marginal design similar to a beveled preparation; however, less
tooth structure is removed in the internal portions of the
preparation. Often, the preparation appears to have been
"scooped out" rather than having the distinct internal
line angles characteristic of a conventional preparation
design. Fig. 11-26 illustrates modified tooth preparation
designs for Classes III, IV, and V preparations.
Modified preparations are primarily indicated for the initial
restoration of smaller, cavitated, carious lesions usually sur-

C

FIG.11-24 Beveled conventional preparation
designs for Class III (A and B), Class IV (C and
D), and Class V (E and F) restorations.

E

C H A P T E R 11

rounded by enamel and for correcting enamel defects. How-

ever, they can be successful for larger restorations as
well. For the restoration of large carious lesions, wider
bevels or flares and retention grooves, coves, or locks
may be indicated in addition to the retention afforded
by the adhesive procedures.
Box-Only. Another modified design is the box-only
tooth preparation (see Fig. 13-35). This design is indicated when only the proximal surface is faulty, with no
lesions present on the occlusal surface. A proximal box
is prepared with either an inverted cone or round diamond stone held parallel to the long axis of the tooth

FIG . 11-25 Ends of enamel rods (A) are more effectively etched,
producing deeper microundercuts than when only the sides of
enamel rods are etched (B).

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

crown. The diamond is extended through the marginal
ridge in a gingival direction. The initial proximal axial
depth is prepared 0.2 mm inside the dentinoenamel
junction (DEJ). The form of the box is dependent on
which diamond is used-more boxlike with the inverted
diamond, more scooped with the round diamond. The
facial, lingual, and gingival extensions are dictated by
the fault or caries. Caries excavation in a pulpal direction
is done with a round bur or spoon excavator. Neither
beveling nor secondary retention is usually indicated.
Facial/Lingual Slot. A third modified design for
restoring proximal lesions on posterior teeth is the facial
or lingual slot preparation (see Fig. 13-36). In this case, a
lesion is detected on the proximal surface but the operator believes that access to the lesion can be obtained
from either a facial or lingual direction, rather than
through the marginal ridge from an occlusal direction.
Usually a small round diamond stone is used to gain access to the lesion. The diamond is oriented at the correct
occlusogingival height, and the entry is made with the
diamond as close to the adjacent tooth as possible, thus
preserving as much of the facial or lingual surface as
possible. The preparation is extended occlusogingivally
and faciolingually enough to remove the lesion. The initial axial depth is 0.2 mm inside the DEJ. The occlusal,
facial, and gingival cavosurface margins are 90 degrees
or greater. Caries excavation in a pulpal direction is done
with a round bur or spoon excavator. This preparation

FIG 11-26 Modified preparation designs for
Class III (A and B), Class IV (C and D), and Class
V (E and F) restorations.

CHAPTER

11

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

is similar to a Class III preparation for an anterior tooth
(see Chapter 12).
Pulpal Protection. As stated earlier, pulpal protection measures for composite restorations are indicated
primarily for direct pulp cap procedures. While some
would suggest the use of a resin-bonding agent on exthis textbook recommends the use of a
posed pulps,
calcium hydroxide liner on vital pulp exposures'$ (see
Chapter 3). Also, because the composite material is
insulative, retentive, and strong, the use of bases in
deeply excavated preparations is unnecessary. Thus the
placement of glass-ionomer types of materials as bases
under composite restorations is not necessary for pulpal
protection.

RESTORATIVE TECHNIQUE FOR
COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS
Once the tooth preparation has been completed, the
prepared tooth structure is readied for composite insertion and finishing. Treating the prepared tooth for bonding requires etching and then application of an adhesive
if only enamel is prepared, or a primer and adhesive if
the composite will be bonded to the dentin as well as
the enamel.
Bonding systems are available in various forms, depending on the manufacturer. Components of one system usually are not interchangeable with another system.
Following the manufacturer's directions is imperative
for success. Likewise, effecting the bond in an acceptable clinical environment, free from moisture contamination, is a requirement.
Whether to place a matrix depends on the part of the
tooth being restored, with most proximal surface restorations requiring a matrix. Whether to place a matrix before or after placement of the etchant, primer, and adhesive is dependent on factors presented in a subsequent
section. Several options also are available for composite
insertion into the tooth preparation, including injection

FIG 11-27

of the composite or hand placement with an instrument.
After insertion and curing of the material, the restoration is contoured and polished.
Preliminary Steps for Enamel and Dentin Bonding.

The acid-etch technique requires that a very exacting sequence be followed if optimal results are to be obtained,
including isolation from fluids (saliva and sulcular seepage) by using either a rubber dam or cotton rolls and/or
retraction cord. Etching enamel affects both the prism
core and prism periphery (Fig. 11-27). Etching dentin affects the intertubular and peritubular dentin, resulting
in enlarging the tubular openings, removing much of
the surface hydroxyapatite, and leaving an interconnected network of collagen fibrils.
Both liquid and gel etchants are available, most in
concentrations of 32% to 37% phosphoric acid. Liquid
etchants may be used when large surface areas are to be
etched, such as when placing full veneers or sealants.
However, thixotropic gels are preferred by most practitioners for the controlled application of etchant to
preparation walls, including bevels and margins. The
etchant gels can be placed carefully with brushes or endodontic paper points held in cotton pliers, but usually
a syringe applicator is used to inject the gel etchant directly onto the prepared tooth structure (Fig 11-28).
Etched surfaces must not be contaminated by mouth
fluids; such contamination adversely affects the etch and
requires repeating the etching procedure. For preparations involving the proximal area, a polyester matrix
strip is placed between the teeth before the acid is applied to prevent inadvertently etching the adjacent
tooth (Fig. 11-29).
If liquid etchants are used, they are applied with
small cotton pellets, foam sponges, or special applicator
tips or microbrushes (Fig. 11-30). The acid (liquid or gel)
is gently applied to the appropriate surfaces to be
bonded, keeping the excess to a maximum of 0.5 mm
past the anticipated extent of the restoration. An etching

Etching patterns of tooth enamel. A, Etching pattern characterized by removal of
prism core. B, Etching pattern showing loss of prism periphery. C, Both etching patterns are evident. (B and C, Courtesy Dr. Leon Silverstone.)

C H A P T E R 11

time of 15 seconds for both dentin and enamel is considered sufficient. For enamel-only preparations, 30 seconds is considered optimal. The area is then rinsed with
water for 5 seconds, starting on the adjacent tooth to
prevent possible splashing of acid-rich water onto the
patient, dentist, or assistant. If cotton rolls were used for
isolation, they should be replaced at this time, making
sure that the tooth preparation does not become contaminated with saliva. The area should be dried with
clean, dry air from the air-water syringe if only enamel
has been etched. Dried etched enamel should exhibit a
ground glass or lightly frosted appearance. If this appearance is not evident, the enamel must be etched
again for an additional 15 to 30 seconds. If both enamel
and dentin have been etched, then the area must be left
slightly moistened. This allows the primer and adhesive
materials to more effectively penetrate the collagen fibrils to form a hybrid layer, which is the basis for the micromechanical bond to dentin. Overdrying etched dentin surfaces compromises dentin bonding as a result of

FIG . 11-28 Syringe used to dispense gel etchant.

FIG 11-29 Clear polyester strips applied (and wedged) before
etching. Adjacent teeth protected from inadvertent etching.

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

the collapse of the collagen network in the etched dentin layer. 23,24,26 This collapse prevents optimal primer
and adhesive penetration and compromises hybrid
layer formation.
For application of a gel etchant, a brush, paper point,
instrument, or syringe is used. The etchant is left untouched for 15 to 30 seconds. The area is then rinsed for
approximately 5 seconds. Gel etchants are more easily
applied with a small syringe. Various etchant syringes
are available and provide the advantage of easier and
more precise control of the etchant. (A typical etchant
syringe is seen in Fig. 11-28.) If the patient has high
caries activity, the enamel usually etches very easily.
Enamel that is resistant to etching may require doubling
or tripling the usual time. Care should be exercised not
to etch adjacent teeth (see Fig. 11-29) or remote areas.
Even though etched areas of enamel appear normal after
several days, scanning electron microscopy has shown
that etched enamel is not completely remineralized
from salivary ions even after 90 days .22 Once the area is
etched and rinsed, it is dried if only enamel has been
etched, but it is left moistened if dentin has been etched
(see the preceding paragraphs).
Most dentin bonding systems rely on some type of
dentin etching and priming to maximize micromechanical adhesion. Dentin etchants typically remove or solubilize the smear layer to achieve optimal adhesion to the
underlying dentin. However, there is no one established
regimen for dentin bonding because it may vary from
one product to another. Dentin etchants and primers
should be applied strictly in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Disposable brushes, microbrushes, or applicator tips are most frequently provided
for primer and adhesive application (see Fig. 11-30).
Many enamel and dentin bonding systems etch
enamel and dentin simultaneously, either with phosphoric acid or alternative etchants. Strict attention to the
manufacturer's directions regarding use of the specific
etchant is imperative to ensure optimal results.
If dentin walls have been dried, they may be rewetted with a water-saturated applicator tip or Gluma Desensitizer. The use of Gluma Desensitizer is especially

FIG . 11-30 Applicator tip or microbrush.

CHAPTER

11

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

beneficial for Class II composite restorations (see Chapter 13). A shiny surface usually indicates a moist surface.
Naturally, it is not desirable to have either excess rewetting agent pooled in the internal aspects of the preparation or dry spots on the prepared dentin.
Once the enamel (and dentin) is etched, rinsed, and
left appropriately moist, the primer is applied to both
surfaces. Most contemporary bonding systems combine
the primer and adhesive into a single bottle, requiring
only one application. If this is the case, it is applied to
the moist, etched prepared surfaces. Application of
primer to etched enamel does not result in any adverse
effects on bond strength to the composite. Any contamination by saliva necessitates repeating the placement of
etchant for a minimum of 10 seconds, followed again by
appropriate primer and adhesive placement. (See Chapter 5 for a detailed description of adhesion philosophy
and technique.)
Matrix Placement. A matrix is a device that may be
applied to a prepared tooth before the insertion of the
composite material. It fits around part or all of the tooth
being restored and functions primarily to confine the
restorative material on axial surfaces (usually the proximal) while assisting in the development of the appropriate axial contour. When a condensable (packable) restorative material is used, the matrix must be rigid
enough to resist deformation from insertion forces (Fig.
11-31). Otherwise, the matrix may be more flexible, especially for anterior restorations (Fig. 11-32). The matrix
should provide the appropriate proximal contact and
contour and prevent major excess of the restorative material beyond the preparation margins on the proximal

FIG . 11-31

surface, especially the gingival margin. It should be relatively easy to apply and remove.
The matrix band may need to be altered (burnished)
to have appropriate contour for the desired shape of the
restoration. It should extend just above (occlusal to) the
marginal ridge and below (gingival to) the gingival
margin. It is held in place by a gingival wedge and, in
some instances, also by a matrix retainer. Whether or
not a matrix retainer is used, the wedge is placed into
the gingival embrasure and is positioned (wedged) between the two adjacent teeth, below the prepared gingival margin, and exterior to (outside) the matrix material
(Fig. 11-33). The wedge functions to: (1) separate the
teeth (which helps to compensate for the thickness of
the matrix material, as it relates to establishing a proximal contact), (2) hold the matrix in place, and (3) prevent or reduce any excess of restorative material at the
gingival margin.
Numerous matrix systems are available. Usually a
Tofflemire matrix system is used for most Class 11
restorations in posterior teeth, and a polyester strip is
used for Classes III and IV restorations in anterior teeth.
However, there are other matrix options presented in
subsequent chapters. Likewise, there are different types
of wedges. Triangular wooden wedges may be needed
for tooth preparations with deeply extended gingival
margins. However, the terminal half-inch of a round
toothpick is the typical wedge selected for most uses in
this textbook.
The placement of etchant, primer, and adhesive may
or may not precede the application of a matrix. The exact sequence for applying the enamel/dentin etchant,

I nsertion of light-cured composite material, maxillary molar. A, A thin Tofflemire-type
matrix is positioned and wedged. Bonding agent has been placed. B through E, Composite is
placed and cured in small increments until preparation is slightly overfilled.

CHAPTER 11

primer, bonding adhesive, and matrix is dependent on
the operator. Some operators prefer matrix application
first, followed by enamel/dentin etchant, primer, bonding adhesive, and finally composite. This sequence may
provide the best isolation of the tooth preparation for
maximum enamel and dentin adhesion. It also allows
an assessment of any enamel fracture (upon insertion of
the proximal wedge) before bonding to that area. If the
matrix is applied first, care must be taken to avoid pooling of the bonding materials, especially the adhesive,
along the junction of the matrix with the gingival margin. Placing the matrix first in the sequence is especially
beneficial when the tooth preparation is deep gingivally.
Other operators prefer to complete all enamel and
dentin etching, priming, and adhesive application before matrix placement. The primary reasons for this sequence are to minimize pooling potential and maximize
the etching, priming, and adhesive placement at the
cavosurface margins. Either sequence may be used as
long as meticulous technique is followed.
I nserting the Composite. The composite restoration
usually is placed in two stages. First, a bonding adhesive

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

is applied (if not already placed during enamel and
dentin etching and priming procedures). Second, the
composite restorative material inserted. With newer
bonding systems the adhesive may be combined with
another component of the system, usually the primer.
Therefore, as always, etching and priming the prepared
tooth structure and placing the bonding adhesive should
be done according to the manufacturer's directions. As
noted earlier, two types of composites exist: self-cured
and light-cured. Self-cured composites are not used extensively because light-cured composites provide additional benefits such as less discoloration, less porosity,
easy placement, and less required finishing. Because a
light source must be applied to the light-cured composite to cause polymerization, it is important that the material be inserted into the tooth preparation in 1- to 2-mm
thicknesses. This allows the light to properly polymerize
the composite and may reduce the effects of polymerization shrinkage, especially along the gingival floor.
Either a hand instrument or syringe can be used for inserting self-cured or light-cured composites. Both methods and materials are presented in detail under insertion

FIG 11-32 I nserting and wedging polyester strip matrix. A, Strip with concave area next to
preparation is positioned between teeth. B, Strip in position and wedge inserted.

FIG. 11-33

A, Correct wedge position. B, Incorrect wedge position.

C H A P T E R 11

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

instructions for specific restorations in the following
chapters. The use of a hand instrument is a popular
method for placing composites because it is easy and
fast. In addition to the simplicity of hand instrument insertion, a smaller amount of composite material is required compared to the amount needed for the syringe
method. A disadvantage of hand instrument insertion
is that air can be trapped in the tooth preparation or incorporated into the material during the insertion procedure. Experience and care in insertion minimizes this
problem.
The syringe technique is popular because it provides
a convenient means for transporting the composite to
the preparation and reduces the possibility of trapping
air. Many manufacturers provide preloaded syringe compules with a light-cured composite (Fig. 11-34). The tips
of the light-cured compules have covers that should be
replaced when not using the material to keep it from being polymerized inadvertently by ambient light. The syringe technique can present a problem in small preparations with limited access because the syringe tip may be
too large. When the preparation opening is questionable, an empty syringe tip should first be tried in the
tooth preparation.
The injectability of composites varies because of differences in viscosity. Some microfill composites cannot be
injected. Therefore this property of the material should
be evaluated before clinical use.
Starting in the most remote area of an anterior tooth
preparation, the composite is steadily injected, ensuring
that the tip remains in the material while slowly withdrawing the syringe (Fig. 11-35). If the area is large, the
light-cured composite is placed in 1- to 2-mm thicknesses, with each increment being cured per manufacturer's instructions. Usually a hand instrument is used
to adapt the composite to the preparation after each syringe injection of material. When curing, the light tip is

kept as close to the material as possible. If using a hand
instrument insertion, a small amount of the composite is
carried to the remote area of the preparation and condensed and cured; then more composite is placed and
cured with care to adapt it well to the internal preparation walls. The preparation is filled to slight excess so
that positive pressure can be applied by the matrix strip.
Before the matrix strip is closed, any gross excess is removed with a hand instrument. The matrix strip is then
closed and secured and the composite cured.
For Class II restorations it is also important to place
and cure the composite incrementally to reduce the effects of polymerization shrinkage, especially along the
gingival floor. For this reason, the first small increment
should be placed along the gingival floor and should
extend slightly up the facial and lingual walls (see Fig.
11-31, B). This increment should only be approximately
1 to 2 mm in thickness because it is the farthest increment from the curing light and is most critical in establishing a proper gingival seal. After the first increment is
cured (see Fig. 11-31, C), subsequent additions are made
and cured (usually not exceeding 2 mm in thickness at a
time) until the preparation is filled to slight excess (see
Fig. 11-31, D and E). The restoration can be contoured
and finished immediately after the last increment is
cured.
Following insertion and polymerization of the composite material, the matrix and wedges are removed, the
restoration cured again from different angles (if light
cured), and the restoration is examined for voids or
lack of proximal contacts. If correction is needed, it
should be accomplished at this time, because any additions will bond satisfactorily to the uncontaminated,
oxygen-inhibited surface layer of the composite material.
Contouring the Composite. Contouring can be initiated immediately after a light-cured composite material
has been polymerized or 3 minutes after the initial hardening of a self-cured material.
Good technique and experience in inserting a composite restoration significantly reduces the amount of
finishing required. Usually a slight excess of material is

FIG 11-34 Examples of pistol grip syringe and preloaded composite compule.

FIG . 11-35 Syringe injection of composite. Air entrapment is
minimized by injecting composite starting in the remote corner
of the preparation and by slowly withdrawing the tip while it is
kept in the restorative material during injection. If light-cured,
i t should be injected and cured in 1- to 2-mm increments.

CHAPTER

II

present that must be removed to provide the final contour and smooth finish. Coarse diamond instruments
can be used for removing gross excess but are not generally recommended for finishing composites because of
the high risk of inadvertently damaging adjacent tooth
structure. They leave a rough surface on the restoration
and tooth, as compared to finishing burs and discs.
However, special fine-diamond finishing instruments
are available commercially and can be used to obtain
excellent results. Care must be exercised with all rotary
instruments to prevent damage to the tooth structure,
especially at gingival marginal areas (see Fig. 12-33).
Contouring the composite restoration requires skill
and knowledge of correct dental anatomy. The contouring instruments are chosen based on the area being contoured (see Figs. 12-33, 13-19, and 13-43). Care must be
taken to not injure the adjacent unprepared tooth structure while contouring the restoration. While accessible
areas are relatively easily contoured, more inaccessible
areas (interproximal contours and margins) are more
difficult. Careful visual and tactile assessment of interproximal contours, contacts, and marginal integrity is
necessary. Naturally, as a final step in contouring, the
restoration's appropriate occlusal relationship must be
developed. Specific contouring techniques for specific
restorations are presented in the following chapters.
Polishing the Composite. Polishing the contoured
composite restoration is done with very fine polishing
discs, fine rubber points or cups, and/or composite polishing pastes. Specific details are presented in Chapters
12 to 15 (see Figs. 12-33, 13-19, and 13-43).
Microfill Composites. Although the same technique
used for finishing composites generally applies to finishing microfill composites, certain differences do exist.
Hybrid composites exhibit an opaque appearance during dry finishing, making the preparation margin easy
to distinguish. Because microfill composites possess a
surface luster similar to that of tooth enamel, it is more
difficult to detect when the restoration has been finished
back to the margin. Also, because less inorganic filler is
present in microfill composites, finishing burs tend to
clog and need periodic debridement.
Although conventional finishing techniques produce
a smooth surface texture with microfill composites, a
higher luster can be obtained by using discs, rubber
points, or cups, all of which are specifically made for
polishing these materials.
REPAIRING COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS
If a patient presents with a composite restoration that
has a localized defect, a repair usually can be made. Easily accessible areas may be roughened with a diamond
stone; the area is etched; primer may be applied if dentin is exposed; adhesive is applied; and finally the composite is inserted, contoured, and polished. If the defect
is not easily accessible, a tooth preparation must be cre-

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

ated that exposes the defective area and a matrix may be
necessary; placement of the etchant, primer, adhesive,
and composite is then performed.
If a void is detected immediately after insertion of a
composite restoration but before contouring is initiated,
more composite can be added directly to the void area.
These materials will bond because the void area has an
oxygen-inhibited surface layer that permits composite
additions. If, however, any contouring has occurred, the
oxygen-inhibited layer may been removed or altered
and the area must be re-etched and adhesive placed before adding more composite.
COMMON PROBLEMS: CAUSES
AND POTENTIAL SOLUTIONS
The following list indicates the causes of common problems associated with some composite restorations, as
well as potential solutions to those problems. The subsequent technique chapters refer back to these, because
they describe specific composite procedures.
POOR ISOLATION OF THE OPERATING AREA
Causes of poor isolation of the operating area include:
No rubber dam or leaking rubber dam
Inadequate cotton roll isolation
Careless technique
Preparation so deep gingivally it cannot be isolated
Potential solutions for poor isolation of the operating
area include:
Better technique
Use of matrix to help isolation
Use of a nonbonded restorative material
Repeat bonding procedures (if the area is contaminated)
WHITE LINE OR HALO AROUND
THE ENAMEL MARGIN
The following factors cause microfracture of marginal
enamel:
• Traumatic contouring or finishing techniques
• Inadequate etching and bonding of that area
• High-intensity light-curing, resulting in excessive
polymerization stresses
Potential solutions include:
• Re-etch, prime, and bond the area
• Conservatively remove the fault and rerestore
• Use atraumatic finishing techniques (e.g., light intermittent pressure)
• Use slow-start polymerization techniques
• Leave as is

CHAPTER 11

Introduction to Composite Restorations

VOIDS
Causes of voids include:
• Mixing of self-cured composites
• Spaces left between increments during insertion
• Tacky composite pulling away from the preparation
during insertion

• Use natural light if possible
• Select the shade before isolating the tooth
• Preoperatively place some of the selected shade on
the tooth and cure (then remove)
• Do not shine operating light directly on the area during shade selection
• Understand the typical zones of different shades for
natural teeth

Potential solutions include:
• More careful technique
• Repair of marginal voids by preparing the area and
rerestoring
WEAK OR MISSING PROXIMAL CONTACTS
(CLASSES II, III, AND IV)
Causes of weak and missing proximal contacts include:
Inadequately contoured matrix band
Inadequate wedging, both preoperatively and during
the composite insertion
Matrix band movement during composite insertion,
or matrix band not in direct contact with the adjacent
proximal surface
A circumferential matrix being used when restoring
only one contact
Tacky composite pulling away from matrix contact
area during insertion
Matrix band too thick
Potential solutions include:
Properly contour the matrix band
Have matrix in contact with adjacent tooth
Use firm preoperative and insertion wedging technique
Use a matrix system that places matrix only around
the proximal surface to be restored
Use specially designed, triangular light-curing tips to
help hold the matrix against the adjacent tooth while
curing
Use a hand instrument to hold the matrix against the
adjacent tooth while curing the incremental placements of composite
Be very careful with insertion technique
INCORRECT SHADE
Causes of an incorrect shade include:
• Inappropriate operator lighting while selecting the
shade
• Selecting the shade after the tooth is dried
• Shade tab not matching the actual composite shade
• Wrong shade selected
Potential solutions include:

POOR RETENTION
Causes of poor retention include:
Inadequate preparation form
Contamination of operating area
Poor bonding technique
Intermingling of bonding materials from different
systems
Potential solutions include:
Prepare the tooth with appropriate bevels or flares
and secondary retention feature, when necessary
Keep the area isolated while bonding
Follow the manufacturer's directions explicitly
Do not intermingle bonding materials from different
systems
CONTOURING AND FINISHING PROBLEMS
Causes of contouring or finishing problems include:
Injuring adjacent unprepared tooth structure
Overcontouring the restoration
Undercontouring the restoration
Ditching cementum
Creating inadequate anatomic tooth form
Dealing with difficult-to-see margins
Potential solutions include:
Be careful with use of rotary instruments to not adversely affect adjacent tooth structure or teeth
Have a proper matrix with appropriate axial and line
angle contours
Create embrasures to match the adjacent tooth embrasure form
Do not use rotary instruments that leave roughened
surfaces
Use a properly shaped contouring instrument for the
area being contoured
Remember the outline form of the preparation
View the restoration from all angles as it is contoured
CONTROVERSIAL ISSUES
Because the practice of operative dentistry is dynamic,
constant changes are occurring. As new products and

CHAPTER 11

techniques are developed, their effectiveness cannot be
assessed until appropriately designed research protocols have tested their worth. There are many such developments occurring at any time, many of which do
not have the necessary documentation to prove their effectiveness, even though they receive very positive publicity. Several examples of such controversies follow.
LINERS AND BASES UNDER
COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS
Various materials have been promoted as liners or bases
under composite restorations. These include RMGIs,
flowable composites, and compomers. Proponents of this
approach do not promote these materials for pulp protection in the traditional sense, but as materials that provide a better seal for composite restorations when extended onto the root surface. These materials are
suggested to not only improve the seal in that area
(which would protect the pulp) but also to act as a stress
breaker, to resist polymerization stresses placed on the
composite restoration. This textbook does not recommend the use of any of these materials routinely for lining deeply extended composite restorations, although
some merit for this technique may exist.
RETENTION IN CLASS V
ROOT-SURFACE PREPARATIONS
This textbook recommends the use of retention grooves
in composite tooth preparations when the operator feels
additional retention form is necessary. However, it is
likely that with the bonding systems available, retention
groove placement is not always necessary.
WEAR PROBLEMS
This textbook recommends that occlusal factors be considered when selecting composite as a restorative material, especially in those clinical situations when it is anticipated there will be heavy occlusal forces or all of the
occlusal contacts will be on the restoration only. However, the wear resistance of some composites is very
similar to that of amalgam, and composite restorations
should be successful for most occlusal patterns where
occlusal contacts are shared with tooth structure.
GAP FORMATION SIGNIFICANCE
As discussed previously, the gap formation that usually
occurs when composite is extended onto the root surface may not have any long-term clinical effects. With
the two vectors of the V-shaped defect being primarily
resin or composite, recurrent caries may not be a problem. However, how long the exposed hybridized resin
layer on the root stays intact is unknown, and if it deteriorates in a short time, the area is left at risk to caries.
Use of one of the proposed liner materials above may
reduce the effect of gap formation.

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

SUMMARY
The use of composite restorations is increasing because
of the benefits accrued from adhesive bonding to tooth
structure, esthetic qualities, and almost universal clinical usage. When done properly, a composite restoration
can provide excellent service for many years. However,
composite restorations are more difficult and technique
sensitive to operator ability than amalgam restorations.
To effect the bond that provides the benefits, the operating site must be free from contamination and the material and bonding technique must be utilized properly.
Subsequent chapters provide additional information about the specific uses of composite as restorative
material.
REFERENCES
1. Akimoto N et al: Biocompatibility of Clearfil Liner Bond 2
and Clearfil AP-X systems on nonexposed and exposed primate teeth, Quintessence Int 29(3):177-88, 1998.
2. American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs,
ADA Council on Dental Benefit Programs: Statement on posterior resin-based composites, J Am Dent Assoc 130:1627-28,
1998.
3. Ausiello P et al: Fracture resistance of endodontically-treated
premolars adhesively restored, Am J Dent 10:237-241, 1997.
4. Bowen RL: Adhesive bonding of various materials to hard
tooth tissues: the effect of a surface active comonomer on adhesion to diverse substrates. V. J Dent Res 44:1369, 1965.
5. Bowen RL: Dental filling material comprising vinyl-silane
treated fused silica and a binder consisting of the reaction
product of bis-phenol and glycidyl acrylate, U.S. Patent No.
3,06,112, Nov. 27, 1962.
6. Bowen RL: Properties of a silica-reinforced polymer for dental restorations, JAm Dent Assoc 66:57,1963.
7. Buonocore MG: A simple method of increasing the adhesion
of acrylic filling materials to enamel surfaces, J Dent Res 34:
849, 1955.
8. Buonocore M, Wileman W, Brudevold F: A report on a resin
composition capable of bonding to human dentin surfaces,
J Dent Res 35:846, 1956.
9. Byram JQ: Principles and practice of filling teeth with porcelain,
NewYork, 1908, Consolidated Dental Manufacturing Co.
10. Calamia JR: High-strength porcelain bonded restorations:
anterior and posterior, Quintessence Int 20(10):717-726,
1989.
11. Charbeneau GT et al: Principles and practice of operative dentistry, ed 1, Philadelphia, 1975, Lea & Febiger.
12. Collins CJ, Bryant RW, Hodge K-LV: A clinical evaluation of
posterior composite resin restorations: 8-year findings, J Dent
26(4):311-317,1998.
13. Combe EC, Burke FJT, Douglas WH: Thermal properties. In
Combe EC, Burke FJT, Douglas WH, editors: Dental biomaterials, Boston, 1999, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
14. Cox CF, Suzuki S: Re-evaluating pulp protection: calcium hydroxide liners vs. cohesive hybridization, J Am Dent Assoc 125:
823-831,1994.
15. Craig, RG: Chemistry, composition, and properties of composite resins, Dent Clin North Am 25(2):219, 1981.
16. Craig RG, editor: Restorative dental materials, ed 11, St Louis,
2001, Mosby.

C H A P T E R 11

I ntroduction to Composite Restorations

17. Davis WC: Operative dentistry, ed 5, St Louis, 1945, Mosby.
18. Ehrnford L, Derand T: Cervical gap formation in Class II composite resin restorations, Swed Dent J 8:15-19, 1984.
19. Farah JW, Dougherty EW: Unfilled, filled, and microfilled
composite resins, Oper Dent 6(3):95, 1981.
20. Feilezer AJ, DeGee AJ, Davidson CL: Setting stress in composite resin in relation to configuration of the restoration,
J Dent Res 66:1636-1639, 1987.
21. Friedman MJ: The enamel ceramic alternative: porcelain veneers vs metal ceramic crowns, CDAJournal 20(8):27-32,1992.
22. Garberoglio R, Cozzani G: In vivo effect of oral environment
on etched enamel: a scanning microscopic study, J Dent Res
58:1859,1979.
23. Gwinnett AJ: Moist versus dry dentin: its effect on shear bond
strength, Am J Dent 5:127-129, 1992.
24. Gwinnett AJ, Kanca JA: Micromorphology of the bonded
dentin interface and its relationship to bond strength, Am J
Dent 5:73-77,1992.
25. Heymann HO: The artistry of conservative esthetic dentistry,
J Am Dent Assoc (special issue):14E-23E, 1987.
26. Heymann HO, Bayne SC: Current concepts in dentin bonding: focusing on dentinal adhesion factors, J Am Dent Assoc
124(5):27-36, May 1993.
27. Heymann HO, Sturdevant JR, Bayne S, et al: Examining tooth
flexure effects on cervical restorations: a two-year clinical
study, J Am Dent Assoc 122:41-47, 1991.
28. Jorgensen KD, Matono R, Shimokobe H: Deformation of cavities and resin fillings in loaded teeth, j Dent Res 84:46-50,1976.
29. Kanca J III: Replacement of a fractured incisor fragment over
a pulpal exposure: a long-term case report, Quintessence Int
27(12):829-832, 1996.
30. Lee WC, Eakle WS: Possible role of tensile stress in the etiology of cervical erosive lesions of teeth, J Prosthet Dent 52(3):
374-380,1984.
31. Leinfelder KF, Isenberg BP, Essig ME: A new method for generating ceramic restorations: a CAD-CAM system, J Am Dent
Assoc 118:703-707, 1989.
32. Liberman R et al: The effect of posterior composite restorations on the resistance of cavity walls to vertically applied
loads, J Oral Rehabil 17:99-105, 1990.
33. Lorton L, Brady J: Criteria for successful composite resin
restorations, Gen Dent 29(3):234, 1981.
34. Mair LH: Ten-year clinical assessment of three posterior resin
composites and two amalgams, Quintessence Int 29:483-490,
1998.
35. Mormann WH et al: CAD-CAM ceramic inlays and onlays: a
case report after 3 years in place, JAm Dent Assoc 120:517-520,
1990.
36. Mormann WH et al: Chairside computer-aided direct ceramic
inlays, Quintessence Int 20:329-339, 1989.
37. Mount GJ: Adhesion of glass-ionomer cement in the clinical
environment, Oper Dent 16:141-148, 1991.

38. Nelson RJ, Wolcott RB, Paffenbarger GC: Fluid exchange at the
margins of dental restorations, J Am Dent Assoc 44:288, 1952.
39. Paffenbarger GC: Silicate cement: an investigation by a group
of practicing dentists under the direction of the ADA research
fellowship at the National Bureau of Standards, J Am Dent
Assoc 27:1611, 1940.
40. Qualtrough AJE, Wilson NHF, Smith GA: The porcelain inlay:
a historical view, Oper Dent 15:61-70, 1990.
41. Randall RC, Wilson NHF: Glass-ionomer restoratives: a systematic review of a secondary caries treatment effect, J Dent
Res 78(2):628-637,1999.
42. Reinhardt JW, Chan DC, Boyer DB: Shear strengths of ten
commercial dentin bonding agents, DentMater 3(1)43-45,1987.
43. Retief DH et al: Tensile bond strengths of dentin bonding
agents to dentin, Dent Mater 2(2):72-77, 1986.
44. Seltzer S: The penetration of microorganisms between the
tooth and direct resin fillings, J Am Dent Assoc 51:560, 1955.
45. Silverstone LM, Dogan IL, editors: Proceedings of the international symposium on the acid etch technique, St Paul, Minn,
1975, North Central Publishing.
46. Skinner EW: Comparison of the properties and uses of silicate cement and acrylic resin in operative dentistry, JAm Dent
Assoc 58:27, 1959.
47. Sockwell CL: Clinical evaluation of anterior restorative materials, Dent Clin North Am 20:403, 1976.
48. Stanley HR: Criteria for standardizing and increasing credibility of direct pulp capping studies, Amer J Dent 11(special
issue):S17-34, 1998.
49. Sturdevant CM et al: The art and science of operative dentistry,
ed 1, NewYork, 1968, McGraw-Hill.
50. Swift EJ: Effects of glass ionomers on recurrent caries, Oper
Dent 14:40-43, 1989.
51. Tagami J, Hosoda H, Fusayama T: Optimal technique of etching enamel, Oper Dent 13:181-184, 1988.
52. Taleghani M, Leinfelder KF, Lane J: Posterior porcelain inlays,
Compend Contin Educ Dent 8(6):410-415, 1987.
53. Torstenson B, Brannstr6m M: Composite resin contraction
gaps measured with a fluorescent resin technique, Dent Mater
4:238-242, 1988.
54. Volker J, Bilkakis E, Melillo S: Some observations on the relationship between plastic filling materials and dental caries,
Tufts Dent Outlook 18:4, 1944.
55. Welk DA, Laswell HR: Rationale for designing cavity preparations in light of current knowledge and technology, Dent
Clin North Am 20(2):231, 1976.
56. Wilder AD et al: Effect of powder/liquid ratio on the clinical
and laboratory performance of resin-modified glass-ionomers,
J Dent 26(4):369-377, 1998.
57. Wilson AD, Kent BE: A new translucent cement for dentistry:
the glass ionomer cement, Brit Dent J 132:133-135, 1972.
58. Yoshikawa T et al: Effects of dentin depth and cavity configuration on bond strength. J Dent Res 78(4):898-905, 1999.

C H A PT E R

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

CLASSES III, IV, AND V DIRECT
COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS
This chapter presents information primarily about typical
Classes III, IV, and V direct composite restorations
(Fig. 12-1). Because Classes III and IV restorations involve
only anterior teeth, an esthetic material such as composite is indicated almost always. Likewise, Class V restorations on anterior teeth usually require esthetic restorations. Although esthetic considerations also are valid for
posterior restorations, many patients are not as concerned
with esthetics in posterior teeth as they are in anterior
teeth. However, the use of composite for any restoration
provides benefits other than improved esthetics.
This chapter also presents information about any differences in these classes of restorations when a microfill
composite or glass-ionomer type material is used.

PERTINENT MATERIAL QUALITIES
AND PROPERTIES
The specific material qualities or properties that make
composite the best material for most Classes III, IV, and
V restorations relate to esthetics. In addition to esthetics,
the other qualities presented in Chapter 11 apply as
well. These include adequate strength and the benefits
of being able to bond the composite to tooth structure,
often resulting in less tooth structure removal during
tooth preparation.

I NDICATIONS
Almost all Class III and Class IV restorations are appropriately restored with composite. Most Class V restorations that are in esthetic prominent areas are also
appropriately restored with composite or other tooth-

colored materials. However, in all of these instances, the
operating area must be able to be adequately isolated to
attain an effective bond. Also, these classes of restorations are best suited for composite or other toothcolored material usage when the tooth preparations
have all-enamel margins.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
The contraindications for use of composite for these
classes of restorations include: (1) an operating area that
cannot be adequately isolated, (2) some Class V restorations in areas that are not esthetically critical, and
(3) some restorations that extend onto the root surface.
The extension onto the root surface (no marginal enamel)
may be a contraindication, because for many extensions
onto the root surface with composite restorations, a
V-shaped gap (contraction gap) is formed between the
root and the composite. This contraction gape." occurs
because the force of polymerization shrinkage of the
composite is greater than the initial bond strength of the
composite to the dentin of the root. The V-shaped gap
is composed of composite on the restoration side and
hybridized dentin on the root side, as seen in Fig. 12-2.
It is not known what the long-term clinical effects of
these gaps may be. Regardless, it should be recognized
that whenever a restoration extends onto the root surface, adverse effects may be associated with the restoration, no matter what restorative material is being used.
For example, even high copper amalgam restorations
will exhibit some marginal leakage, at least for a short
period of time. Thus, any extension onto the root surface
requires the best and most meticulous efforts of the operator to best insure a successful, long-lasting restoration.

F
FIG. 12-1

Composite restorations before and after. A and B, Class III. C and D, Class IV. E and F, Class V.

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

FIG . 12-2

Contraction gap. A, V-shaped gap on root surface. B, Restoration-side vector is composite; root-side vector is hybridized dentin.

ADVANTAGES
The advantages of using composite for these restorations are the same as those presented and discussed in
Chapter 11.
DISADVANTAGES
Likewise, the disadvantages of using composites for
Classes III, IV, and V restorations were presented and
discussed in Chapter 11.
CLINICAL TECHNIQUE FOR
DIRECT CLASS III COMPOSITE
RESTORATIONS
I NITIAL CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Chapters 10 and 11 presented information about procedures necessary before beginning the restoration:
(1) Anesthesia may be necessary for patient comfort, and
if used, will help decrease the salivary flow during the
procedure. (2) Occlusal assessments should be made to
help in properly adjusting the restoration's function and
in determining the tooth preparation design. (3) The
shade must be selected before the tooth dehydrates and
experiences concomitant lightening. (4) The area must
be isolated to permit effective bonding. (5) If the restoration will be large (including all of the proximal contact),
prewedging the area will assist in the reestablishment of
the proximal contact with composite.
TOOTH PREPARATION
Class III tooth preparations, by definition, are located on
the proximal surfaces of anterior teeth. Such locations
have been the predominant sites for the use of composite restorations in the past because of the typical need
for esthetic restorations in anterior teeth. Because the
bond of composite to enamel and dentin is so strong,
most Class III composite restorations are retained only
by the micromechanical bond from acid-etching and

resin bonding, so no additional preparation retention
form is usually necessary. Using diamond stones for the
tooth preparation leaves the prepared surfaces rougher,
thereby increasing the surface area and the micromechanical retention. Sometimes a groove or cove may be
necessary for Class III restorations that either extend
onto the root surface or are very large. Usually, however, additional needed retention form can be achieved
simply by increasing the surface area with a wider
enamel bevel or flare along the margin.
When a proximal surface of an anterior tooth is to be
restored and there is a choice between facial or lingual
entry into the tooth, the lingual approach is preferable.
A small carious lesion should be treated from the lingual approach unless such an approach would necessitate excessive cutting of tooth structure, such as in instances of irregular alignment of the teeth or facial
positioning of the lesion.
The advantages of restoring the proximal lesion from
the lingual approach include:
1. The facial enamel is conserved for enhanced esthetics.
2. Some unsupported, but not friable, enamel may be left
on the facial wall of a Class III or Class IV preparation.
3. Color matching of the composite is not as critical.
4. Discoloration or deterioration of the restoration is
less visible.
The indications for a facial approach include:
1. The carious lesion is positioned facially such that
facial access would significantly conserve tooth
structure.
2. The teeth are irregularly aligned, making lingual access undesirable.
3. Extensive caries extend onto the facial surface.
4. A faulty restoration that was originally placed from
facial approach needs to be replaced.

C H A P T E R 12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

C

FIG 12-3 A and B, Combination preparation design for a Class
III lesion that extends onto root surface. The root-surface portion is a conventional tooth preparation design utilizing butt
j oint marginal configuration and retention groove in dentin.
The coronal portion is a beveled conventional tooth preparation design.

When both the facial and lingual surfaces are involved, use the approach that provides the best access
for instrumentation.
It is expeditious to prepare and restore approximating
carious lesions or faulty restorations on adjacent teeth at
the same appointment. Usually one of the preparations
will be larger (more extended outline form) than the
other. When the larger outline form is developed first,
the second preparation usually can be more conservative because of the improved access provided by the
larger preparation. The reverse order would be followed when the restorative material is inserted.
Conventional Class III Tooth Preparation. The primary indication for this type of Class III preparation is
for the restoration of root surfaces. Thus, it would be unusual to have an entire Class III preparation of the conventional type. More likely, only a portion of a tooth
preparation-the portion on the root surface that has no
enamel margin-would be prepared in this manner
(Fig. 12-3). The design of the preparation then would be
a combination of a modified or a beveled conventional
preparation (as presented later) with a conventionally
prepared root-surface area. The exception would be
when all of a lesion, fault, or defective restoration is located on the root surface of a tooth, which would result
in the entire preparation being the conventional type,
exhibiting butt joint margins (Fig. 12-4). This preparation would be identical to the slot preparation for amalgam illustrated and described in Chapter 17.
When preparing the conventional portion of a preparation (on the root surface), the form of the preparation
walls is the same as that of an amalgam preparation.
The cavosurface margins exhibit a 90-degree cavosurface angle and provide butt joints between the tooth and
the composite material. Thus the external walls are pre-

E

D
FIG 12-4 Class III conventional tooth preparation for a lesion
entirely on root surface. A, Mesiodistal longitudinal section ill ustrating carious lesion. B, Initial tooth preparation. C, Tooth
preparation with infected carious dentin removed. D, Retention grooves shown in longitudinal section, and transverse
section through plane cd illustrates contour of axial wall and
direction of facial and lingual walls. E, Preparing retention form
to complete tooth preparation.

pared perpendicular to the root surface. In this conventionally prepared area of the tooth, which is apical of
the cervical line, the external walls will be entirely of
dentin and cementum. These walls must be prepared to
a sufficient depth pulpally to provide for the following:
(1) adequate removal of the caries, old restorative material, or fault, and sometimes (2) the placement of retention grooves, if deemed necessary. This wall depth
(depth to axial line angles) usually will be approximately
0.75 mm into dentin, assuming no additional caries excavation is required. Groove retention form may be necessary in nonenamel, root-surface preparations to both
increase the retention of the material in the tooth and to
optimize the seal of the composite to the root surface.
The crown areas of the preparation (where enamel
margins are present) are prepared to have a beveled or

CHAPTER 12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

flared marginal configuration (from either a beveled conventional or modified tooth preparation) and a pulpal
depth dictated by either the extent of the existing restoration being replaced or the extent of the infected portion of the carious lesion. Typically the retention of the
restorative material in the crown portion of the preparation would be provided by the bond afforded by etching
the enamel and dentin surfaces, by priming the dentinal
surfaces, and placing bonding adhesive to all prepared
surfaces.
The specific design for the conventional Class III
tooth preparation can be reviewed in Chapter 18 in the
section on Class III tooth preparation for amalgam, but
it is also presented for composite in the following paragraphs, which describe the stages and steps of this rootsurface tooth preparation.
Using a No.
1, or 2 round bur or diamond, prepare
the outline form on the root surface, extending the external walls to sound tooth structure while extending
pulpally to an initial depth of 0.75 mm, if, in a subsequent step, the preparation of retention grooves will be
necessary. However, if no retention groove is anticipated, the initial depth will be only that which removes
the caries or fault, although still no deeper at this stage
than 0.75 mm. The bur or diamond at this limited depth
may be touching dentin, previous restorative material,
carious tooth structure, or air. Prepare the external walls
perpendicular to the root surface, thus forming a 90degree cavosurface angle. It is emphasized that during
this step in tooth preparation, the instrument's cutting
edges are moved to this limited, initial pulpal depth and
no deeper. Any remaining infected dentin will be removed later.
The boxlike design may be considered a part of retention form; however, at this stage in tooth preparation
the external walls may be retentive because of opposing
wall parallelism or slight undercuts, or nonretentive because of slight divergence outwardly. If prepared with a
diamond, the prepared walls also will be roughened.
If the preparation approach is from the facial, the opening may be enlarged to provide necessary access and visibility; if the approach is lingual, the access opening may
be extended for the same reason. Once adequate access
is achieved, remove all remaining infected dentin using
round burs or small spoon excavators, or both. Remaining old restorative material on the axial wall should be
removed if any of the following conditions are present:
(1) the old material is amalgam and its color would negatively affect the color of the new restoration; (2) there is
radiographic evidence of caries under the old material;
(3) the tooth pulp was symptomatic preoperatively; (4)
the periphery of the remaining restorative material is not
intact (i.e., there is some breach in the junction of the material with the adjacent tooth structure, which may indicate caries under the material); or (5) the use of the underlying dentin is necessary to effect a stronger bond for
1/2

retention purposes. If none of these conditions is present,
the operator may elect to leave the remaining restorative
material to serve as a base, rather than risk unnecessary:
(1) excavation nearer to the pulp, or (2) irritation or exposure of the pulp. A calcium hydroxide liner would be indicated only for a direct or indirect pulp cap procedure as
described in Chapters 4 and 6.
Groove retention may be necessary in root-surface
preparations to better ensure that the restorative material is retained in the tooth. The retention groove created
also may help in minimizing the potential negative effects of polymerization shrinkage (the composite pulling away from the margin) when inserting the composite incrementally. Additionally, this groove will enhance
the marginal seal by resisting flexural forces (from tooth
flexure) placed on the cervical portion of the restoration.
A continuous retention groove can be prepared in the
internal portion of the external walls using a No. 1
round bur. A continuous groove is utilized when maximum retention need is anticipated. The groove is located 0.25 mm (half the diameter of the No. 1 round
bur) from the root surface and is prepared to a depth of
0.25 mm (half the diameter of the No. 1 round bur).
This groove is directed as the bisector of the angle
formed by the junction of the axial wall and the external
wall (see Fig. 12-4, D and E). For its entire length the
groove should be parallel to the root surface. Use the
side of the No. round bur for cutting retention form
whenever possible to control retention depth. When less
retention need exists, the retention grooves may be
omitted or placed only in the gingivoaxial and/or incisoaxial line angles. Lastly, clean the preparation of any
visible debris and inspect for final approval.
/4

/4

/4

1/4

Beveled Conventional Class III Tooth Preparation.

The beveled conventional tooth preparation for composite restorations is indicated primarily for replacing
an existing defective restoration in the crown portion of
the tooth. However, it also may be used when restoring
a large carious lesion for which the need for increased
retention and/or resistance form is anticipated. The tooth
preparation takes the shape of the existing restoration
along with any extensions necessary to include recurrent caries, friable tooth structure, or defects. Any extensions required may be prepared with a modified tooth
preparation design, as discussed in the next section. The
beveled conventional preparation is characterized by
external walls that are perpendicular to the enamel surface, with the enamel margin beveled. The axial line angles may or may not be of uniform pulpal depth, varying as the thickness of the enamel portion of the external
walls varies. If part of the tooth to be restored is located
on the root surface, a conventional cavosurface configuration should be used in this area as described earlier,
resulting in a combination of two tooth preparation designs, a conventional type in the root portion, and a
beveled conventional type in the crown portion.

CHAPTER 12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

The tooth preparation for the replacement restoration
will have the same general form of the previous (old)
tooth preparation (often the existing restoration will
have utilized a conventional preparation design). Usually retention is obtained by bonding to the enamel and
dentin and no groove retention is necessary. However,
when replacing a large restoration or restoring a large
Class III lesion, the operator may decide that retention
form should be enhanced by placing groove (at gingival) and/or cove (at incisal) retention features in addition to the bonded tooth structure.
Lingual Access. Because indirect vision usually is
required for the preferred lingual access for a tooth preparation, a clean, unscratched front surface mirror is recommended to provide a clear, undistorted view. Sometimes direct vision may be used to advantage by tilting
the patient's head.
Use a round carbide bur (No. 1/2, 1, or 2) or diamond
stone, the size depending on the extent of the caries or
defective restoration, to prepare the outline form (Fig.
12-5). Before contacting the tooth, the cutting instrument is positioned for entry and rotated at high speed
using air-water spray. The assistant directs air on the
mirror surface and positions the evacuator tip near the
operating site. The point of entry is within the incisogingival dimension of the carious lesion or defective
restoration and as close to the adjacent tooth as possible,
without contacting it (Fig. 12-6, A). Direct the cutting instrument perpendicular to the enamel surface, but at an
entry angle that places the neck portion of the bur as far
into the embrasure (next to the adjacent tooth) as possible; use light pressure and intermittent cutting (brush
stroke) to gain access into the lesion. Incorrect entry overextends the lingual outline into potential stress areas
(marginal ridges) and unnecessarily weakens the tooth
(see Fig. 12-6, B and C). The same instrument may be

used to enlarge the opening sufficiently to allow for the
later described caries removal, completion of the preparation, and insertion of the restorative material (see
Fig.12-6, D).
Extend the external walls to sound tooth structure during preparation of the outline form, but only to the initial limited prescribed depth. This extension should be
as minimal as possible, dictated by the extent of caries
and/or old restorative material on these walls. Unless
absolutely necessary, do not: (1) include the proximal
contact area, (2) extend onto the facial surface, or (3) extend subgingivally. The axial wall depth at this initial
stage of tooth preparation is limited to 0.2 mm inside
the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ) (if no retention groove
will be used), which means it will be approximately
0.75 to 1.25 mm deep (the larger being incisally where
enamel is thicker). The axial wall will be outwardly convex, following normal external tooth contour and the
DEJ, both incisogingivally and faciolingually (Fig. 12-7,
A and B). Usually the axial line angles should be positioned at an initial depth of 0.2 mm into dentin. However, if a retention groove is to be placed, the axial wall
should be 0.5 mm into dentin at retention locations to
prevent undermining enamel where the retention form
is prepared. As noted previously when the preparation
outline extends gingivally onto the root surface, the
depth of the axial wall at the gingivoaxial line angle
should be 0.75 mm, thus providing adequate dimension
for composite strength, placement of a retention groove,
and maintenance of strength of the gingival wall and
margin. The axial depth should not be exceeded at this
initial stage of tooth preparation even if the bur is cutting in air, caries, or old restorative material. Any remaining infected dentin or old, defective restorative
material on the axial wall will be removed during the final tooth-preparation stage.

FIG 12-5 A, Small proximal carious lesion on mesial surface of maxillary lateral incisor. B, Dotted
line indicates normal outline form dictated by shape of carious lesion. C, Extension (convenience
form) required for preparing and restoring preparation from lingual approach when teeth are in
normal alignment.

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

Prepare the enamel walls perpendicular to the external
tooth surface. The gingival floor and lingual wall usually
are finished with the same round cutting instrument that
was used to prepare the outline form. If there is not an
ample facial, lingual, or gingival embrasure space to
avoid marring the adjacent tooth with the cutting instrument, use the 8-3-22 hoe to better finish those walls.
Once the outline form and initial axial wall depth have
been established, the initial tooth preparation stage is
completed and the final stage of tooth preparation begins. For most Class III restorations using the beveled
conventional preparation, the preparation would be
complete at this time except for placing an enamel bevel
or flare.
Remove all remaining infected dentin using round
burs or small spoon excavators, or both. Some undermined enamel can be left in nonstress areas, but very
friable enamel at the margins should be removed. Re-

maining old restorative material on the axial wall
should be removed if any of the conditions presented
earlier are present. Apply a calcium hydroxide liner
only if indicated.
If retention features (grooves or coves) are indicated
(and usually they are not), prepare them along the gingivoaxial line angle and, sometimes, the incisoaxial line
angle with a No. 1/4 bur. Occasionally retention may be
provided by undercuts left from caries removal. No
purposeful attempt is made to provide retentive undercuts along the linguoaxial and facioaxial line angles because these areas usually are not needed to retain composites and might unnecessarily weaken the lingual and
facial enamel walls and margins. Particular care must be
exercised not to weaken the walls or incisal angles that
are subject to masticatory forces.
If deemed necessary, prepare a gingival retention
groove along the gingivoaxial line angle. Care should be

FIG 12-6 Beginning Class III conventional tooth preparation (lingual approach). A, Bur or diamond
i s held perpendicular to enamel surface, and initial opening is made close to adjacent tooth at
i ncisogingival level of caries. B, Correct angle of entry is parallel to enamel rods on mesiolingual
angle of tooth. C, Incorrect entry overextends lingual outline. D, Same bur or diamond is used
to enlarge opening for caries removal and convenience form while establishing initial axial wall
depth.

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

exercised to prepare this groove approximately 0.2 mm
inside the DEJ to a depth of 0.25 mm (half the diameter
of the No. 1/4 bur) so as not to undermine the enamel
portion of the gingival wall. The depthwise direction of
the groove is an angle that bisects the junction of the axial wall and external walls. Low handpiece speed with
air coolant for this step provides better tactile sensation
and vision. Start the gingival groove at the faciogingivoaxial point angle and extend along the gingivoaxial
line angle to the linguogingivoaxial point angle. The
lengthwise direction of the groove parallels the DEJ
without undermining the adjacent enamel of its dentin
support.
Prepare any necessary incisal retention cove with the
No. 1/4 bur at the axioincisal point angle with the bur
oriented in a similar angle, 0.2 mm inside the DEJ, and
0.25 mm deep. Then extend it slightly into the facioaxial
line angle where it fades out. Care should be exercised
not to take away dentinal support from the enamel. It is
emphasized that the incisal retention is directed facioincisopulpally, where possible, rather than incisopulpally.
Sometimes this feature is critical in preserving the
strength of a weak incisal corner of a tooth. The completed gingival retention groove and incisal retention
cove for a large Class III beveled conventional tooth
preparation are illustrated in Fig. 12-8.
The placement of incisal retention is not always as
easy in the mouth as illustrated because of handpiece
size and angulation problems caused by the anatomy of
the maxilla and tooth positions. When teeth are rotated
or abnormally aligned, additional extension of the incisal portion of the lingual wall may be necessary to
provide the convenience form necessary to prepare the
incisal retention with the No. 1/4 bur. Also, extension of
the bur out of the handpiece often enhances visibility
and access in these circumstances. Another method is to
use a bibeveled hatchet (i.e., 3-2-28) with delicate shav-

ing strokes in a facioincisopulpal direction, removing
small amounts of dentin until the area is retentive. This
is an excellent instrument for testing to see that the incisal retention is present, regardless of the method used
to obtain the retention.
Class III beveled conventional tooth preparations are
prepared as conventional preparations with the addition of a cavosurface bevel or flare of the enamel rather
than a butt joint margin (Figs. 12-9, A and B, and 12-10).
The cross-sectional view in Fig. 12-11 illustrates the
cavosurface bevel that provides more surface area for
end-on etching of the enamel rods. The cavosurface bevel
or flare is best prepared with either a flame-shaped or
round diamond instrument, resulting in an angle approximately 45 degrees to the external tooth surface

FIG 12-7 I deal initial axial wall preparation depth. A, Incisogingival section showing axial wall 0.2 mm into dentin. B, Faciol i ngual section showing facial extension and axial wall following
contour of tooth.

FIG 12-8 Large beveled conventional Class III preparation. A and B, Beveled enamel walls and
i ncisal and gingival retention grooves.

CHAPTER

1 2

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

C

FIG 12-9 Beveled conventional preparation designs for Class III (A and B), Class IV (C and D),
and Class V (E and F) restorations.

E

Large Class III beveled conventional tooth preparation. Note cavosurface bevel (arrow).

FIG 12-10

(Fig. 12-12). A bevel width of 0.25 to 0.5 mm is considered sufficient unless the operator elects to increase the
retention form by preparing a wider bevel, which will
increase the surface area to be etched and therefore the
retention form. For moderate and large Class III beveled

conventional preparations, all accessible enamel margins usually are beveled, with the exception of the gingival margin. This margin is usually not beveled if little
or no enamel is present or access is difficult for finishing
procedures. If the preparation extends gingivally onto
root structure, no bevel is placed on cementum, and the
area is prepared as a conventional preparation. In addition, bevels may not be recommended on lingual surface margins that are in areas of centric contact or subjected to heavy masticatory forces because composite
has less wear resistance than enamel for withstanding
heavy attritional forces. Clean the preparation of any
visible debris and inspect for final approval.
Facial Access. With a few exceptions, the same
stages and steps of tooth preparation are followed as
with lingual access. The procedure is simplified because
direct vision is used and the lesion or faulty restoration
is usually larger.
A large Class III lesion on the distal surface of a maxillary right central incisor is illustrated (Fig. 12-13, A).
The rubber dam is placed after the anesthetic has been
administered and the shade has been selected. A wedge
is inserted in the gingival embrasure to depress the rubber dam and underlying soft tissue, thus improving gingival access (see Fig. 12-13, B). Using a No. 2 carbide bur
or diamond stone rotating at high speed and with airwater spray, prepare the outline form with appropriate
extension, as well as the initial, limited pulpal depth
previously described in the lingual approach prepara-

C H A P T E R 12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

FIG . 12-11 A, Cross-section of facial approach Class III conventional tooth preparation with 90-degree cavosurface
angle. B, Beveled conventional tooth preparation showing
45-degree cavosurface bevel on facial margin.

FIG 12-12 Beveling. Cavosurface bevel is prepared with flameshaped or round diamond resulting in an angle approximately 45
degrees to the external tooth surface.

FIG . 12-13 Class III initial preparation (facial approach). A, Large proximal caries with facial involvement. B, Isolated area of operation. C, Entry and extension with No. 2 bur or diamond.
D, Caries removal with spoon excavator. E, Explorer point removes caries at DEJ. This is a
beveled conventional preparation if accessible margins are beveled (see Fig. 12-15).

tion (see Fig. 12-13, C). Some undermined enamel can be
left if it is not in a high-stress area. Accessible enamel
margins can be finished with the cutting instrument.
Other walls may be completed with hand instruments,
such as the 7-85-2 1/2-6 or 12-85-5-8.
When a proximal carious lesion or faulty restoration
extends onto both the facial and lingual surfaces, access
may be accomplished from either a facial or lingual approach. An example of an extensive Class III initial tooth
preparation that allows such choice is illustrated in Fig.
12-14. Recall that if the preparation extends gingivally
onto root structure, no bevel is placed on cementum and
the area is prepared as a conventional tooth preparation.

The final tooth preparation is accomplished by removing any remaining infected dentin with a round bur
rotating at low speed or a small spoon excavator, or
both (see Fig. 12-14, D). The point of a No. 2 explorer
may be used for judiciously detecting and removing
traces of caries at the DEJ (see Fig. 12-14, E). If old restorative material remains on the axial wall after preparing the outline form, follow the procedure previously
described in the lingual access preparation. Apply a calcium hydroxide liner only if indicated for pulp protection. Prepare groove or cove retention, if indicated, using a No. 1/4 bur, or undercuts remaining from caries
removal may suffice. Bevel accessible enamel margins

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

with a flame-shaped or round diamond instrument, resulting in an angle approximately 45 degrees to the external tooth surface. A bevel of 0.25 to 0.5 mm is considered sufficient. The completed Class III facial approach
preparation is illustrated in Fig. 12-15. Final preparation
procedures are cleaning and inspecting.
Modified Class III Tooth Preparation. A modified
tooth preparation is the most used type of Class III tooth
preparation. It is indicated for small and moderate lesions or faults and is designed to be as conservative as
possible. The preparation design is dictated by the extent of the fault or defect and is prepared from a lingual
approach when possible, with an appropriate size round
bur or diamond instrument. No effort is made to produce preparation walls that have specific shapes or
forms other than external angles of 90 degrees or
greater. The extension axially also is dictated by the extent of the fault or carious lesion and usually will not be
uniform in depth. Weakened, friable enamel is removed
while preparing the cavosurface margins in a beveled or
flared configuration with the round diamond. Usually
no groove (or cove) retention form is indicated because
the retention of the material in the tooth will result from
the bond created between the composite material and
the etched peripheral enamel. Thus, the preparation design appears to be "scooped" or concave (Fig. 12-16, A
and B). Most initial composite restorations utilize the
modified preparation design. Because a carious lesion
that requires a restoration usually extends into dentin,
many modified preparations will be prepared to an initial axial wall depth of 0.2 mm into dentin. However, no
attempt is made to prepare distinct or uniform axial
preparation walls, but rather, the objective is to include
only the infected carious area as conservatively as possible by "scooping" out the defective tooth structure.
Additional caries excavation (deeper than the initial

FIG . 12-14

stage of 0.2 mm pulpal of the DEJ) or marginal refinement may be necessary later.
Begin the preparation from a lingual approach (if possible) by making an opening using a round carbide bur
(No. 1/2 1, or 2) or diamond instrument, the size depending on the extent of the lesion. Before contacting
the tooth, the bur is positioned for entry and rotated at
high speed using air-water spray. The assistant directs
air on the mirror surface and positions the evacuator tip
near the operating site. The point of entry is within the
incisogingival dimension of the lesion or defect and as
close to the adjacent tooth as possible without contacting it (see Fig. 12-6, A). Direct the cutting instrument
perpendicular to the enamel surface, but at an entry angle that places the neck portion of the bur or diamond
instrument as far into the embrasure (next to the adjacent tooth) as possible; use light pressure and intermittent cutting (brush stroke) to gain access into the preparation. Incorrect entry overextends the lingual outline
into potential stress areas (marginal ridges) and unnecessarily weakens the tooth (see Fig. 12-6, B and C). The
same instrument may be used to enlarge the opening
sufficiently to permit, in subsequent steps, caries removal, completion of the preparation, and insertion of
the restorative material (see Fig. 12-6, D).
No effort is made to prepare walls that are perpendicular to the enamel surface; in fact, for small preparations the walls may diverge externally from the axial
depth in a scoop shape resulting in both (1) a beveled
or flared marginal design and (2) conservation of internal tooth structure (Fig. 12-17). For larger modified
preparations, the initial tooth preparation will still be
prepared as conservatively as possible, but the preparation walls may not be as divergent from the axial
wall. The term axial wall is used because in more extensive preparations at this initial preparation stage, an

Large Class III tooth preparation extending onto root surface. A, Facial view. B, Lingual
view. C, Mesial view showing gingival and incisal retention. Tooth preparation is now ready for
beveling of the enamel walls.

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

axial wall should be of limited depth, 0.2 mm internal
of the DEJ (it may be in dentin, caries, or air). Subsequent beveling or flaring of accessible enamel areas
may be required. However, the objective of initial tooth
preparation is the same for both situations: to prepare the
tooth as conservatively as possible by extending the outline
form only the amount necessary to include the peripheral
extent of the lesion. Note that sometimes the incorpora-

tion of an enamel bevel or flare also may be used to extend the final outline form to include the carious lesion
(Fig. 12-18).
Extensions should be minimal, including only that
tooth structure that is necessary because of the extent of
the caries or defect. Some undermined enamel can be
left in nonstress areas, but very friable enamel at the
margins should be removed. If possible, the outline
form should not: (1) include the entire proximal contact
area, (2) extend onto the facial surface, or (3) be extended subgingivally.
Usually the axial wall will not be uniform in depth,
but must provide access for the removal of infected dentin and the application of the etchant, primer, bonding
adhesive, and composite. If the preparation outline extends gingivally onto the root surface, the gingival wall
should form a cavosurface angle of 90 degrees and the
depth of the gingivoaxial line angle should be 0.75 mm
for reasons discussed previously. This depth should not
be exceeded in this initial stage of tooth preparation.

When completed, the initial stage for the modified
tooth preparation extends the outline form to include all
of the fault unless it is anticipated that the incorporation
of an additional enamel bevel will complete that objective. Small preparations will typically have a beveled or
flared marginal configuration from the initial tooth
preparation. Therefore, there may be little to do in the final tooth preparation stage for these preparations. If infected dentin remains (deeper than the initial axial wall

FIG 12-15 Completed Class III beveled conventional tooth
preparation (facial approach).

FIG . 12-16 Modified

preparation designs for
Class III (A and B), Class IV (C and D), and Class
V (E and F) restorations.

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

depth), remove it by using suitably sized round burs
and/or small spoon excavators. If indicated, place a calcium hydroxide liner over only the deepest portion of
the excavated area, so that a maximum of dentinal surface is still exposed for bonding the restorative material.
Larger preparations that are extended into dentin
may require additional beveling or flaring of the accessible enamel walls to enhance retention. Bevel these
enamel margins with a flame-shaped or round diamond
instrument. Prepare the bevel by creating a 45-degree
angle to the external surface and to a width of 0.25 to
0.5 mm. Recall that if the gingival floor has been extended gingivally to a position where the remaining
enamel thickness is minimal or nonexistent, the bevel is
omitted from this area to preserve the remaining enamel
margin. Likewise, a bevel on the lingual enamel margin
of a maxillary incisor may be precluded because of the
presence of occlusal contact, for reasons previously
noted. Thus, final tooth preparation steps for a modified
tooth preparation are, when indicated: (1) removal of infected dentin, (2) pulp protection, (3) bevel placement

FIG . 12-17 Drawing of a small, scoop-shaped Class III modified tooth preparation.

A
FIG 12-18

on accessible enamel margins, and (4) final procedures
of cleaning and inspecting.
RESTORATIVE TECHNIQUE
Etching, Priming, and Placing Adhesive. The etching, priming, and adhesive placement steps are accomplished with strict adherence to the manufacturer's directions for the particular bonding system being used. If
the bonding will be to enamel only, a separate priming
step is not necessary. However, if the bonding system
combines the primer and adhesive components, placing
this "one-bottle" type bonding material on etched enamel
surfaces does not adversely affect the bond strength. If
dentin is being bonded, it is important that the dentin be
left in a slightly moistened state after etching and before
primer application. (For a review of bonding methods,
see Chapters 4 and 5.)
The usual technique for etching, priming, and adhesive placement is as follows. First, the proximal surface of
the adjacent unprepared tooth should be protected from
inadvertent etching by placing a polyester strip. Then a
gel etchant is applied to all of the prepared tooth structure, approximately 0.5 mm beyond the prepared margins onto the adjacent unprepared tooth (Fig. 12-19). The
etchant is typically left undisturbed for 15 to 30 seconds
(30 seconds for enamel-only preparations and 15 seconds
when dentin is involved). The area is then washed to remove the etchant. If dentin is exposed, rather than air-dry
the rinsed area, it is better to use a damp cotton pellet, a
disposable brush, or a paper tissue to remove the excess
water. The dentin surface should remain moist, as evidenced by a glistening appearance. Neither areas of
overdrying or pooling of excess water should be allowed
(see Chapter 11).
The primer is applied to all of the prepared tooth
structure with a microbrush or other suitable applicator

B

A, Decalcified area extending mesially from cavitated Class V lesion. B, Completed
beveled conventional Class V preparation with conservative mesial extension.

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

tip (Fig. 12-20). The manufacturer's directions will specify how long to apply the primer, how long it should be
cured, and whether or not to apply additional coats. In
all cases, the dentin should be uniformly shiny following primer application, as evidence of sufficient coating.
If dry spots remain, an additional coat or coats of primer
are indicated.
If the bonding system does not combine the primer
and adhesive, the bonding adhesive is applied next. Another microbrush or applicator tip is used to place the
adhesive on all of the tooth structure that has been
etched and primed. Every effort should be made to prevent the adhesive from pooling in remote areas of the
preparation. Once applied, the adhesive is polymerized
with the curing light as directed. Because these materials are resin based, they generally exhibit an oxygeninhibited layer on the surface, following polymerization. The composite material will bond directly to the
cured adhesive unless the oxygen-inhibited layer is contaminated. Therefore the application of the adhesive
and the composite should occur in a timely manner.
Matrix Application. A matrix is a device that is applied to a prepared tooth before the insertion of the
restorative material. Its purposes include confining the
restorative material excess and assisting in the development of the appropriate axial tooth contours (see Chapter 11 for other matrix objectives).
The matrix is usually applied and stabilized by a
wedge (and compound if necessary) before application
of the enamel/ dentin etchant, primer, and bonding adhesive (the bonding system). Placing the matrix first
provides an opportunity to assess that the gingival
cavosurface tooth structure is sound and not fractured
because of wedge insertion. However, care must be
taken to avoid pooling of these bonding materials if
the matrix is applied first. If any portion of the preparation remains in contact with the adjacent tooth, the
matrix should be placed before etchant, primer, and
adhesive use.

FIG 12-19

Syringe used to dispense gel etchant.

Not only will a matrix aid in placing, confining, and
contouring the composite restorative material, but also
it may aid in isolating the tooth preparation, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of the enamel/ dentin bonding
system (if done after matrix application). A proper matrix also reduces the amount of excess material, thereby
minimizing the finishing time. A properly contoured
and wedged matrix is a prerequisite for a restoration involving the entire proximal contact area.
A matrix for the proximal surface of an anterior tooth
should be made of a thin material, such as polyester or
metal, that can be easily contoured. There are two main
types of matrices: (1) a clear polyester strip matrix and
(2) a compound-supported metal matrix. The compoundsupported matrix is seldom used for Class III restorations and will be described as an alternative matrix system only for Class IV restorations.
A properly contoured polyester strip matrix is used
for most Class III and Class IV preparations. Because the
proximal surface of a tooth is usually convex incisogingivally and the strip may be flat, it is necessary to shape
the strip to conform with the desired tooth contour. One
way to contour a polyester strip is by drawing it across
a hard, round object such as the rounded, back end of
operating pliers (Fig. 12-21). The amount of convexity
placed in the strip depends on the size and contour of
the anticipated restoration. Several pulls of the strip with

FIG 12-20

Applicator tip or microbrush

f I g . 12-21 Contouring polyester strip matrix by drawing it over
rounded back end of operating pliers.

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

heavy pressure across the rounded end of the operating pliers may be required to obtain enough convexity.
Some strip dispensers provide this convexity as the strip
is dispensed (Fig. 12-22). Position the contoured strip
between the teeth so that the convex area conforms to
the desired tooth contour (Fig. 12-23, A). Extend the matrix strip at least 1 mm beyond the prepared gingival
and incisal margins. Sometimes the strip will not slide
through or is distorted by a tight contact or preparation
margin. In such instances, a wedge is lightly positioned
in the gingival embrasure before the strip is inserted.
Once the strip is past the binding area, it may be necessary to loosen the wedge to place the strip past the gingival margin (between the wedge and margin). Then
reinsert the wedge tightly (see Fig. 12-23, B).
A wedge is needed at the gingival margin to: (1) help
hold the strip in position, (2) provide slight separation
of the teeth, and (3) help prevent a gingival overhang
of the composite material. A wedge is required when
all of the proximal contact is involved because the wedge
must separate the teeth sufficiently to compensate for
the thickness of the matrix if the completed restoration
is to properly contact the adjacent tooth.
Several types of commercial wedges are available in assorted sizes. A triangular-shaped wedge (in cross-section)

FIG 12-22 Polyester strip matrix dispenser.

is indicated for preparations with margins that are deep
in the gingival sulcus. An end of a round wooden toothpick approximately % inch (9 mm) long usually is an excellent wedge. The wedge is kept as short as possible to
avoid conflict with access during insertion of the restorative material.
Place the wedge, using No. 110 pliers, from the facial
approach for lingual access preparations (and vice versa
for facial access), just apical to the gingival margin.
When isolation is accomplished with the rubber dam,
wedge placement may be aided by a small amount of
water-soluble lubricant on the tip of the wedge. The rubber dam is first stretched gingivally (on the side from
which the wedge is inserted) and then released gradually during wedge insertion (Fig. 12-24). Subsequently, a
trial opening and closing of the matrix strip is helpful. It
must open enough for access to insert the bonding materials and composite, and close sufficiently to ensure
proper contour. It may be necessary to shorten the
wedge or insert it from the opposite embrasure to optimize access. Wedge placement may result in fracture of
the proximal cavosurface tooth structure. If this occurs,
retreatment of that area with the bonding materials must
occur.
I nserting and Curing the Composite. The composite restoration usually is placed in two stages: first, a
bonding adhesive is applied (if not already placed during enamel and dentin treatment procedures) and then
the composite restorative material is inserted. The freeflowing bonding adhesive engages the numerous microundercuts produced in the etched enamel as well as
bonds to the etched and primed dentin to provide micromechanical retention. When the composite material is
added, a chemical bond occurs with the bonding adhesive, thus forming a strong attachment between the
tooth and the composite. If used in conjunction with
enamel etching and dentin etching/priming, along with

A

B

FIG . 12-23 I nserting and wedging polyester strip matrix. A, Strip with concave area next to
preparation is positioned between teeth. B, Strip in position and wedge inserted.

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

a bonding adhesive, most composite restorations produce an effective seal.'
Recall that two types of composites exist: self-cured
and light-cured. Even though most restorative composites used are the light-cured type, there are some indications for using self-cured composites, albeit more as
cementing agents than restorative materials. For selfcured composites, both the bonding adhesive and composite are supplied in individual containers of a catalyst
and a base. Whereas additional shades of the composite
base material are available, the catalyst usually remains
the same. Items needed for mixing include a disposable
plastic spatula, applicator tips or microbrushes, mixing
pads, and operating pliers.
Because the mixing and application of the bonding
adhesive and then the mixing and insertion of composite should follow a reasonably rapid sequence, the materials are dispensed in advance. Equal amounts of the
composite catalyst and base (pastes) are placed on the
pad first because they do not have a tendency to run together. The setting time can be controlled by varying the
proportion of catalyst and base. Variations as great as
2:1 of either catalyst or base to the other can be tolerated
without an appreciable effect on the physical properties.
However, it is always best to follow the manufacturer's
instructions because of variations from one brand to another. The total amount of material dispensed depends
on the size of the preparation and method of insertion.
This material is expensive, and needless waste often occurs. A new disposable plastic spatula is used to remove
the pastes from the jars. To prevent cross-contamination
of the contents in the jars, it is important to use one end
of a new spatula for dispensing the catalyst paste and the
other end for base paste. This same spatula is placed adjacent to the pad so that it will be available for mixing.
The bonding adhesive is dispensed last and mixed
first. It is a liquid with low surface tension and has a tendency to run together. Usually one drop of each component (catalyst and base) is dispensed onto a second mixing pad, leaving a space of 1/4 inch (6 mm) between the
drops. The applicator tip (or microbrush) is used to stir
the components of the bonding adhesive together for

FIG . 12-24

5 seconds. It should be quickly blotted against a paper
towel to remove excess and the bonding adhesive immediately applied to the etched enamel and etched and
primed dentin with a microbrush or applicator tip.
The composite material is mixed next with the same
disposable plastic spatula that was used to dispense the
materials. An assistant can mix the composite while the
operator is mixing and applying the bonding adhesive.
To initiate mixing, one paste is picked up with the spatula and placed on top of the other. With a wiping and
folding motion, the catalyst and base are blended together for 30 seconds to obtain a homogeneous mixture. A stirring motion should be avoided because of the
tendency to incorporate air into the mixture. Approximately 1 minute of working time remains for insertion
of the material into the preparation. The self-cured material may be inserted with a syringe or hand instrument, as described later.
The use of a hand instrument is a good method for
placing composites because it is easy and fast. In addition to the simplicity of hand instrument insertion, a
smaller amount of composite material is required, as
compared to the amount needed for the syringe method.
A disadvantage of hand instrument insertion is that air
can be trapped in the preparation and/or incorporated
into the material during the insertion procedure. Experience and care in insertion, which is described later,
will minimize this problem.
An example of a syringe used for injecting self-cured
composites is shown in Fig. 12-25 with its disposable tip
and stopper. Black tips that are impervious to light penetration also are available for storing and injecting lightcured composite. The syringe technique is popular because it provides a convenient means for transporting the
composite to the preparation and reduces the possibility
of trapping air. Many manufacturers produce preloaded
syringe tips with a light-cured composite (Fig. 12-26) and
most are color coded for easy shade identification.
The syringe technique may present a problem in small
tooth preparations with limited access because the syringe tip may be too large. When the preparation access
is questionable, an empty syringe tip can first be tried

Using a triangular wood wedge to expose gingival margin of large proximal preparation. A, Dam is stretched facially and gingivally with fingertip. B, Insertion of wedge (dam is
released during wedge insertion). C, Wedge in place.

C H A P T E R 12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

FIG 12-25 Composite i njection syringe (x) with disposable tip (y) and stopper (z). Used for injection of self-cured
composites.

f I G 12-26 Examples of pistol grip syringe and
composite compule.

FIG . 12-27

preloaded

into the preparation to verify access and, if not possible,
hand-instrument insertion should be used.
The injectability of composites varies because of differences in viscosity and inorganic filler. Some microfill
composites cannot be injected. Therefore this property
of the material should be evaluated before clinical use.
Insertion of Self-Cured Composites. The matrix is
in place as previously described. Whenever possible, tilt
the patient's head for direct vision, but most of the time
indirect vision is required. With the mirror, hold the lingual portion of the strip away from the preparation
opening to reflect light and to provide a clear view for
inserting the composite (Fig. 12-27). Leave the facial end
of the strip free.
With self-cured composites, the time interval between
mixing and polymerization is very short. Therefore mixing and application of materials must be carefully coordinated for optimal results. Everything must be in a
"ready-to-go" position before mixing is initiated. Materials are inserted in two steps: bonding adhesive first
and composite material second.
The mesial surface of a maxillary left lateral incisor
serves as an example for a hand instrument insertion
procedure (Fig. 12-28, A). If not already applied, mix the
previously dispensed bonding adhesive with an applicator tip and blot against a paper towel to remove excess that would flood the preparation. During application, cover the entire preparation (etched enamel and
etched/primed dentin) with the bonding adhesive. It is
not necessary to wait for the bonding adhesive to set before placing the composite, because the outer surface of
the bonding adhesive does not harden in the presence of
air. If placement of the composite is delayed, this sticky

Mirror is used to hold lingual portion of strip away from preparation, reflect light, and
provide a clear view for insertion of composite.

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

film need not be removed, because it will polymerize
when air is excluded by the composite that is subsequently placed over it.
Mix the composite material as previously described.
Most self-cured composite restorations require approxi mately 4'/Z minutes for the complete procedure: 30 seconds for mixing, 1 minute for insertion, and 3 minutes
undisturbed time for final setting. Insert the mixed
composite in two stages. First, pick up a small amount
(approximately one half the preparation size) on the
blade end of the hand instrument (Fig. 12-29) and wipe
into the tooth preparation (see Fig. 12-28, B). Then use
the plugger end to press the material into the retentive
areas. If the composite has a tendency to stick to the instrument, a sparing amount of bonding adhesive can be
used as a lubricant. This is easily obtained by touching
the tip of the instrument to the bonding material left on
the mixing pad or on the applicator tip. Apply a second
increment of composite to completely fill the preparation and provide a slight excess so that positive pressure can be applied with the matrix strip. Remove
quickly any gross excess with the blade of the insertion instrument or an explorer tine before closing the
matrix.

Set the mirror aside, and close the lingual end of the
strip over the composite and hold with the index finger.
Next, close the facial end of the strip over the tooth with
the thumb and index finger of the other hand, tightening the gingival aspect of the strip ahead of the incisal
portion. The matrix can be held in this manner until
polymerization is complete, or the thumb of the first
hand can be placed over the facial of the strip to hold it
without movement during final polymerization (see
Fig. 12-28, C). This latter maneuver frees the other hand
for testing the hardening of the unused composite remaining on the mixing pad. After the composite hardens, remove the wedge and matrix strip before finishing
the restoration.
A self-cured composite also may be inserted with a
syringe. For this technique, mix the bonding adhesive
and apply with an applicator tip in the usual manner.
Following mixing of the composite, fill the syringe tip
by pressing the large open end of the tip repeatedly into
the composite mixture ("cookie-cutting") and then insert the stopper to force the material forward. Quickly
place the filled syringe tip into the barrel of the injection
syringe, and engage the plunger and press to extrude
some of the composite out of the tip.

Hand instrument insertion of composite. A, Class III lingual approach tooth preparation is to be restored. B, Composite is wiped into tooth preparation with blade end of hand instrument. C, Matrix strip is closed and held until composite is polymerized.
FIG. 12-28

f I G 12-29

Anodized aluminum insertion instruments for composite.

C H A P T E R 12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

Starting in the most remote area of the preparation,
steadily inject the composite, being sure that the tip remains in the composite, while slowly withdrawing the
syringe to prevent air entrapment (Fig. 12-30). Fill the
preparation to slight excess so that positive pressure
can be applied by the matrix strip. Before the matrix
strip is closed, remove any gross excess with a hand instrument. Close and secure the matrix strip as described
previously.
If the tooth preparation has a facial access, hold the
polyester strip on the lingual aspect of the tooth to be restored with the index finger while the thumb reflects the
facial end out of the way. If the wedge protrudes enough
to interfere with access, shorten and/or reposition it.
Mix and apply the bonding adhesive as previously
described. Follow the same insertion technique with a
hand instrument or syringe for the facial approach as
with the lingual approach. The procedure is simplified
because direct vision can be used.
Insertion of Light-Cured Composites. Most composite materials used for restorative purposes are the
light-cured type. Many types of visible light units and
brands of light-cured composites are commercially available. Light-cured materials usually include an enamel/
dentin bonding system and numerous syringes or selfcontained syringe tips (compules) of various shades of
composite. No mixing of the visible light-cured materi-

FIG 12-30 Syringe injection of composite. Air entrapment is
minimized by injecting composite starting in remote corner of
preparation and by slowly withdrawing tip while it is kept in
restorative material during injection. If light-cured, the composite should be injected and cured in 1 to 2 mm increments.

als is necessary unless a shade modification is desired.
The operator should not dispense either the bonding
adhesive or the composite until they are ready to be
used. Both of these materials will begin to harden when
exposed to daylight or other lights in the operatory.
The mesial surface of a maxillary left lateral incisor is
used to demonstrate facial insertion of a light-cured composite. The matrix strip is contoured, placed interproximally, and wedged at the gingival margin. Secure the
lingual aspect of the strip with the index finger while
the thumb reflects the facial portion out of the way (Fig.
12-31, A). Light-cured materials do not have to be mixed
and are not dispensed until ready for use.
Apply the bonding adhesive to the etched enamel and
etched /primed dentin with a small foam sponge, microbrush, or applicator tip (see Fig. 12-31, B). Distribute this
material evenly. Cure the bonding adhesive with the visible light source for 10 to 20 seconds, with the tip near the
preparation, but not touching the tooth. Now insert the
composite by hand instrument or syringe. Light-cured
composites are available in two forms: a threaded syringe for hand instrument insertion or a self-contained
compule that is placed into an injection syringe for syringe insertion. If a hand instrument is to be used for
insertion, the knurled knob on the back of the syringe
is rotated to force material out the other end. An instrument is used to cut off an amount that will restore the
preparation, and it is then placed onto a paper pad. The
insertion of the composite is then as described for selfcured composites. The material on the paper pad should
be protected from ambient light, to prevent premature
setting.
If the composite is to be injected directly into the
preparation, the selected compule is placed into the injection syringe, the protective cap on the compule removed, and the composite injected into the preparation
as described previously. The protective cap should be
replaced when the compule is not being used to protect
the material from exposure to ambient light.
Once the material has been inserted, cure it through
the strip for 20 seconds (see Fig. 12-31, C). Do not touch
the strip with the tip of the light initially because it
could distort the contour of the restoration. Then re-

B
FIG. 12-31 I nsertion of light-cured composite. A, Lingual aspect of strip is secured with index finger while facial portion is reflected away for access. Bonding adhesive is applied (B) and cured.
C, Following insertion of composite, matrix strip is closed and material is cured through strip.

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

move the index finger and light-cure on the lingual surface an additional 20 seconds. Longer exposure to the
light usually is required for the polymerization of dark
and opaque shades. If the restoration is undercontoured,
more composite can be added to the previously placed
composite and cured. No etching or bonding adhesive
is required between layers if the surface has not been
contaminated and the oxygen-inhibited layer remains.
With large restorations, it is better to add and cure the
composite in several increments to reduce the effects of
polymerization shrinkage and to ensure more complete
curing in remote regions.
Adjacent proximal tooth preparations should be restored one at a time. Techniques have been suggested for
inserting two approximating restorations simultaneously, but these procedures may result in matrix movement, poor adaptation, open contact, overhangs, and
faulty contours (Fig. 12-32).
If there are two adjacent preparations, restore the preparation with the least access first. Once the matrix strip
has been placed and wedged, apply the bonding adhesive and cure. Again, depending on the individual circumstance and operator, insert the composite with either a hand instrument or syringe. If there is too much
convexity present on the first proximal restored, the excess must be removed before the second restoration is inserted. If too little contour is present, more material is
added to correct the contour. The first restoration should
be contoured completely before the second one is started.
Because the second tooth preparation will have been
contaminated, it will need to be cleaned, etched, and
primed before the adhesive and composite are inserted.
During these procedures, a strip should be in place to
protect the first restoration and tooth.

Contouring and Polishing the Composite. Good
technique and experience in inserting composites significantly reduce the amount of finishing required. Usually a slight excess of material is present that must be removed to provide the final contour and smooth finish.
Coarse diamond instruments can be used to remove
gross excess, but they generally are not recommended
for finishing composites because of the high risk of inadvertently damaging contiguous tooth structure. They
also leave a rough surface on the restoration and tooth,
as compared to finishing burs and discs. However, special fine diamond finishing instruments are available
commercially that can be used to obtain excellent results
if the manufacturer's instructions are followed. Care
must be exercised with all rotary instruments to prevent
damage to the tooth structure, especially at the gingival
marginal areas.
Facial Areas. A flame-shaped carbide finishing bur
or polishing diamond is recommended for removing excess composite on facial surfaces (Fig. 12-33, A). Use
medium speed with light intermittent brush strokes and

FIG 12-32

Adjacent restorations, restored simultaneously and
displaying faulty contours and gingival overhangs.

FIG. 12-33 Finishing and polishing. A, Flame-shaped finishing bur removing excess and contouring. Rubber polishing point (B) and aluminum oxide polishing paste ICI used for final poli shing. D, Completed restoration.

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

an air coolant for contouring. Final finishing and polishing are achieved with a rubber polishing point (see Fig.
12-33, B) and, sometimes, an aluminum oxide polishing
paste (see Fig. 12-33, C and D).
For some locations commercially available abrasive
discs (degree of abrasiveness depends on the amount of
excess to be removed) mounted on a mandrel specific to
the disc type, in an angle handpiece at low speed, can be
substituted for or used after the finishing bur or diamond
(Fig. 12-34, A). An example of a disc system known as
Sof-Lex (3M-ESPE, St. Paul, Minnesota) is available for
contouring and polishing. These discs are flexible and
are produced in several diameters and abrasive textures.
Also, Pop-On discs and mandrels (3M-ESPE, St. Paul,
Minnesota) are available. This unique design provides a
much smaller metal center and allows the disc to be
placed on, and removed from, the mandrel without the
need for proper orientation. Thin discs with small diameters, such as Super Snap discs (Shofu Dental Corporation, Menlo Park, California), will fit into embrasure
areas more easily and are especially useful in contouring and polishing gingival areas. Regardless of the type
of disc used, discs are used sequentially from coarse to
fine grit, thereby generating a smooth surface.
These discs are rotated at low speed. The external
enamel surface should act as a guide for proper contour.
A constant shifting motion will aid in contouring and

preventing the development of a flat surface. Final polishing is done with a fine grit disc or suitable rubber
points or cups. Use rotary instruments very carefully in
gingival locations to prevent inadvertent and undesirable removal of tooth structure (see more information in
the Class V section).
Lingual Areas. Lingual excess of composite is removed and a smooth surface is produced using a round
or oval 12-bladed carbide finishing bur or diamond at
medium speed with air coolant and light intermittent
pressure (see Fig. 12-34, B). The appropriate size and
shape used is dependent on the amount of excess and
shape of the lingual surface. White stones in various
shapes and sizes also may be used for final finishing of
the lingual surface.
Proximal and Embrasure Areas. The proximal surface contours and margins should be assessed visually
and tactilely with an explorer and dental floss. The floss
is positioned below (gingival to) the gingival margin
and "shoe-shined" as it is pulled occlusally. If the floss
catches or frays, additional finishing is indicated. A
sharp gold finishing knife, amalgam knife (Scaler 34/35),
or No. 12 surgical blade mounted in a Bard-Parker handle (see Fig. 12-34, C) is well suited for removing excess
material from the gingival proximal area. The instrument should be moved from the tooth to the restoration
or along the margins, using light shaving strokes, keep-

B

D
C
FIG. 12-34 Finishing composites. A, Abrasive disc mounted on mandrel can be used for finishi ng when access permits. B, Round carbide finishing bur is well suited for finishing lingual surfaces. C, No. 12 surgical blade in Bard-Parker handle can be used for removing interproximal
excess. D, Abrasive strip should be curved over area to be finished.

C H A P T E R 12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

ing a portion of the cutting edge on the external enamel
surface as a guide to prevent overreduction. If a large
amount of composite is removed with one stroke or in
the wrong direction, it may fracture inside the tooth
preparation and warrant a repair, because the irregular
void created may collect plaque and debris and invite
discoloration or recurrent caries. Using the secondary
cutting edges on the heel aspect of the gold knife or
amalgam knife blade in a scraping-pull mode is often
preferred over using the primary cutting edge in the
shaving mode. The knife blade design having these secondary edges in an arc is very helpful.
A No. 12 surgical blade in a Bard-Parker handle also
may be used because the curved shape of the blade
and the thin diameter make this instrument ideal for
removing gingival overhangs. Gently shave away the
excess to avoid removing a large chunk of material
unintentionally.
Special carbide finishing burs (Esthetic Trimmers,
Brasseler USA, Savannah, Georgia) and carbide hand instruments (Carbide Carvers, Brasseler USA, Savannah,
Georgia) can be used for removing excess and opening
embrasure areas. Caution must be taken with all instruments not to remove too much contour or to produce a
"ledged" contact (a ledge bordering the contact area). All
carbide instruments are made of carbon steel and may
leave gray marks on the restoration. This discoloration
is superficial and is easily removed during the final finishing by abrasive strips or discs (see Fig. 12-34, D).
Further contouring and finishing of proximal surfaces
can be completed with abrasive finishing strips as well.
Some strips have two different types of abrasives (medium and fine) on opposing ends of the strip, with a
small area between where no abrasive is present to allow easy and safe insertion of the strip through the contact area. The medium grit is usually zirconium silicate,
and the fine grit is generally aluminum oxide. Diamond
coated thin metal strips also are commercially available
and come in various grits as well. Different widths of
the strips are available. A narrow width is usually more
appropriate for contouring because it allows more versatility for finishing specific areas. Wide strips tend to
flatten the proximal contour, remove too much material
at the contact areas, and extend too far gingivally. This
results in a poor contour and a weak or absent contact,
which must be corrected.
The strip should not be drawn back-and-forth across
the restoration in a "sawing" manner. Rather, it should
be curved over the restoration and tooth surface in a
fashion similar to that used with a shoe-shine cloth,
concentrating on areas that need attention (see Fig. 1234, D). To open the lingual embrasure or round the marginal ridge, the lingual part of the strip is held against
the composite with the index finger of one hand, while
the other end of the strip is pulled facially with the
other hand.

Contouring and finishing the proximal surface,
including the gingival margin, also develops the general embrasure form around the proximal contact. Further embrasure-form development is accomplished
with additional use of flame-shaped 12-bladed carbide
finishing burs, diamonds, the amalgam knife, or the
No. 12 surgical blade.
Occlusion. Remove the rubber dam if one was used.
Evaluate the occlusion by having the patient close lightly
on a piece of articulating paper and slide the mandibular teeth over the restored area. If excess composite is
present, remove only a small amount at a time and
recheck with articulating paper. It is sometimes appropriate to recontour the adjacent and/or opposing natural
teeth, although care must be taken not to remove that
tooth's centric or functional contact or injudiciously remove too much tooth structure or restorative material.
CLINICAL TECHNIQUE FOR
DIRECT CLASS IV COMPOSITE
RESTORATIONS
I NITIAL CLINICAL PROCEDURES
The same initial procedure considerations presented
earlier are appropriate for Class IV restorations. The
preoperative assessment of the occlusion is even more
important for Class IV restorations because it may influence the tooth preparation extension (placing margins in noncontact areas) and retention and resistance
form features (heavy occlusion requires increased retention and resistance form). Thus, occlusal factors may
dictate a more conventional tooth preparation form,
with more resistance form features (boxlike, flat floors,
and walls and floors parallel to the long axis and perpendicular to the occlusal forces) and secondary retention form features (grooves and wider bevels).
Also, proper shade selection may be more difficult for
large Class IV restorations that do not have normal
dentin colorations. Use of separate translucent or opaque
shades of composite may be necessary. Also, the use of
a microfill composite as a veneer over a hybrid composite core may provide improved esthetic results. Specific
information for esthetic considerations is presented in
Chapter 15.
Because it is likely that the proximal contact must be
restored, prewedging before tooth preparation will benefit the effort to restore the contact. Finally, for large
Class IV lesions or fractures, isolation of the area may be
difficult and extension onto the root surface may affect
the preparation design.
TOOTH PREPARATION
The Class IV composite restoration has provided the
profession with a conservative treatment to restore fractured (Fig. 12-35), defective, or variously involved anterior teeth when, previously, a porcelain crown may have

C H A P T E R 12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

been the treatment of choice. A brief description of the
three types of tooth preparations is presented. However,
the conventional tooth preparation design has minimal
clinical Class IV application except in those areas that
have margins located on root surfaces. The beveled conventional tooth preparation usually is indicated for large
Class IV restorations, while the modified tooth preparation is indicated for smaller Class IV needs. If a large
amount of tooth structure is missing, groove retention
form may be indicated even when the preparation periphery is entirely in enamel. Also, to provide additional
retention in high stress areas, the enamel bevels may be
increased in width to provide greater surface area for
etching, resulting in a stronger bond between the composite and the tooth. Last, to provide appropriate resistance form, the preparation walls may need to be prepared in such a way as to resist occlusal forces. This
often requires proximal facial and lingual preparation
walls that form 90-degree cavosurface angles, which are
subsequently beveled, and a gingival floor prepared
perpendicular to the long axis of the tooth. This boxlike
form may provide greater resistance to fracture of the
restoration and tooth from masticatory forces.
Conventional Class IVTooth Preparation. As previously noted, there are few indications for this tooth
preparation form except for any portion(s) of the restoration extending onto the root. The typical conventional
preparation design with 90-degree cavosurface margins
is included in the following section on beveled conventional tooth preparations. Remember, however, any portion of any Class IV restoration that extends onto the
root requires a 90-degree cavosurface margin and possible groove retention form, regardless of whether either
a beveled conventional or modified preparation design
is used for the portion of the preparation in the crown of
the tooth.

FIG . 12-35 Mesioincisal angle fractured on central incisor.

Beveled Conventional Class IV Tooth Preparation.

The beveled conventional Class IV tooth preparation is
indicated for restoring large proximal areas that also include the incisal surface of an anterior tooth. In addition
to the etched enamel margin, retention of the composite
restorative material in beveled conventional Class IV
tooth preparations may be obtained by groove or other
shaped undercuts, dovetail extensions, threaded pins,
or a combination of these. All of these features would be
part of the final stage of tooth preparation. Gingival and
incisal retentive undercuts may be indicated in large
Class IV preparations and are similar to those used in
the Class III preparation in which rounded undercuts
are placed in the dentin along line angles and into point
angles wherever possible, without undermining the
enamel (see Fig. 12-9, C and D). An arbitrary dovetail
extension onto the lingual surface of the tooth may enhance both the restorations strength and retention, but
it is less conservative and therefore not used often. Incisal and gingival retention and dovetail extension are
illustrated in Fig. 12-36.
Although pin retention is sometimes necessary, the
use of pins in composite restorations is discouraged for
several reasons: (1) the placement of pins in anterior
teeth involves the risk of perforation either into the pulp
or through the external surface; (2) pins do not enhance
the strength of the restorative material;' and (3) some
pins may corrode because of microleakage of the restoration, resulting in significant discoloration of the tooth
and restoration (Fig. 12-37). Despite these disadvantages, when a large amount of tooth structure is missing, pin retention may be necessary to retain the composite restoration.
A maxillary right central incisor is illustrated in Fig.
12-38, A. It has large defective Class III restoration and a
fractured mesioincisal corner, which upon removal ne-

FIG. 12-36 I ncisal and gingival retention grooves and dovetail
extension in a large Class IV beveled conventional tooth
preparation before beveling.

C H A PT E R

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

cessitates a Class IV restoration. Class IV beveled conventional tooth preparations are characterized by an
outline form that occurs when the preparation walls are
prepared as much as possible perpendicular or parallel
to the long axis of the tooth. This results in a design that
provides greater resistance to biting forces that could
cause fracture of the tooth or restorative material. Using
an appropriate size round carbide bur or diamond instrument at high speed with air-water coolant, prepare
the outline form. Remove all weakened enamel and establish the initial axial wall depth at 0.5 mm into dentin
(because groove retention form will likely be utilized).
Prepare the walls as much as possible parallel and perpendicular to the long axis of the tooth.
Excavate any remaining infected dentin as the first
step of final tooth preparation. If necessary, apply a calcium hydroxide liner. Bevel the cavosurface margin of
all accessible enamel margins of the preparation. The
bevel is prepared at a 45-degree angle to the external
tooth surface with a flame-shaped or round diamond instrument (see Fig. 12-38, B). The width of the bevel
should be 0.25 to 2 mm, depending on the amount of
tooth structure missing and the retention perceived necessary. Retention form is provided primarily by the micromechanical bonding of the composite to the enamel
and dentin. Additional retention may be obtained by
increasing the width of the enamel bevels or placing retention undercuts. If retention undercuts are deemed
necessary, prepare a gingival retention groove using a
No. 1/4 round bur. It is prepared 0.2 mm inside the DEJ at
a depth of 0.25mm (half the diameter of the No. 1/4 bur)

and at an angle bisecting the junction of the axial wall
and gingival wall. This groove should extend the length
of the gingival floor and slightly up the facioaxial and
linguoaxial line angles (see Fig. 12-38, C). No retentive
undercut is usually needed at the incisal area, where
mostly enamel exists. Fig. 12-38, D, illustrates the completed Class IV beveled conventional tooth preparation.
Modified Class IV Tooth Preparation. The modified
Class IV preparation for composite is indicated for small
or moderate Class IV lesions or traumatic defects. The
objective of the tooth preparation is to remove as little
tooth structure as possible, while removing the fault
and providing for appropriate retention and resistance

FIG. 12-37 Tooth and restoration discoloration caused by microleakage and subsequent corrosion of pin.

FIG.12-38 Class IV beveled conventional tooth preparation. A, Large defective Class III restoration with resulting fractured incisal angle. B, Beveling cavosurface. C, Gingival retention groove.
D, Completed Class IV beveled conventional tooth preparation.

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

forms. Remove any existing lesion or defective restoration with a suitable size round bur or diamond instrument and prepare the outline form to include weakened,
friable enamel. Usually little or no initial tooth preparation is indicated for fractured incisal corners, other than
roughening the fractured tooth structure. The cavosurface margins are prepared with a beveled or flared configuration similar to that previously described. The axial
depth is dependent on the extent of the lesion, previous
restoration, or fracture, but initially no deeper than
0.2 mm inside the DEJ. Usually no groove or cove retention form is indicated. Instead, the retention is obtained primarily from the bonding strength of the composite to the enamel and dentin (see Fig. 12-16, C
and D). The treatment of teeth with minor traumatic
fractures requires less preparation than the beveled conventional example. If the fracture is confined to enamel,
adequate retention usually can be attained by simply
beveling sharp cavosurface margins in the fractured
area with a flame-shaped diamond instrument followed
by bonding (Fig. 12-39).
RESTORATIVE TECHNIQUE
Etching, Priming, and Placing Adhesive. The etching, priming, and placement of adhesive techniques are
the same as described for the Class III composite restoration. Also, the same considerations presented previously are appropriate for whether or not the matrix is
placed before or after the etching, priming, and adhesive placement.
Matrix Application. The polyester strip matrix also
can be used for most Class IV preparations, although
the strip's flexibility makes control of the matrix somewhat difficult. This may result in an overcontoured or
undercontoured restoration and/or open contact. Also,
composite material will extrude incisally, but this excess
can be easily removed when contouring and finishing.
Creasing (folding) the matrix at the position of the lingual line angle helps reduce the potential undercontouring (rounding) of that area of the restoration. The
matrix is positioned and wedged as described for the
Class III composite. Gingival overhangs and open con-

FIG 12-39

tacts are common with any matrix techniques that do
not employ gingival wedging. A commercially available
preformed plastic or celluloid crown form is usually too
thick and therefore is not recommended as a matrix.
If the operator does not have sufficient experience in
using the more flexible polyester strip matrix, the compound-supported matrix may be necessary for large
Class IV preparations. To ensure correct proximal contour, a nonyielding compound-supported metal matrix
that provides an access area for insertion of the restorative material may be used. A Class IV tooth preparation,
facial approach, serves as an example for the application
of this type of matrix (Fig. 12-40, A). Cut a piece of deadsoft metal matrix material (Dead Soft Metal Matrix,
DenMat Corporation, Santa Maria, California) (.0015 inch
[0.04 mm] thick and %
3 inch [8 mm] wide) to a length of
5/8 inch (16 mm). Then orient, trim, and adjust this strip
so that the facial edge protrudes just flush with the facial surface of the tooth (vice versa for lingual access)
and the gingival and incisal edges extend beyond the
preparation margins at least 1 mm (see Fig. 12-40, B).
For facial access the lingual portion of the strip is
adapted to the lingual surface of the tooth and a wedge
is placed from the facial or lingual embrasure, whichever is greater (see Fig. 12-40, C and D). Burnish proximal
contour into the strip with the side of a No. 2 explorer or
the back of a Black spoon excavator. An optional wedge
technique is the use of a toothpick that is positioned
while having a small amount of softened impression
compound on its tip (Fig. 12-40, E).
Soften more impression compound over a Bunsen
burner and form a small cone. Lightly flame the base
and attach to the gloved index finger. Without delay,
soften the cone tip over the flame and then press over
the lingual area and into the gingival embrasure. It is
helpful to hold the matrix strip against the adjacent contact area with a burnisher while the compound is applied. Observe the adaptation of the matrix to the lingual preparation margin through the open facial access
and, if needed, correct the proximal contour using the
back of a spoon excavator while the compound is still
moldable (Fig. 12-40, F). If the compound has hardened,

Class IV modified tooth preparation. A, Minor traumatic fracture. B, Fractured enamel
i s roughened with flame-shaped diamond instrument. C, Completed Class IV modified tooth
preparation.

C H A P T E R 12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

it may be necessary to soften the compound by using a
warmed burnishing instrument on the preparation side
of the strip. Also, if a small amount of compound is
pressed between the matrix strip and the adjacent tooth,
the compound is easily repositioned correctly by the application of a warm burnisher on the preparation side of
the matrix in the contact area. It is best to always do this
to ensure that the strip is touching the adjacent tooth at
contact area. This precaution, coupled with the separation by the wedge, better assures proper contour and
proximal contact of the restoration after removal of the
matrix. Any compound that may contact the composite
during insertion should be removed because it may
cause discoloration.
Ample opening is left in the completed matrix to insert the enamel/ dentin bonding material and composite
from the facial approach as illustrated in Fig. 12-40, G. If
a Class IV preparation is to be filled from lingual approach, the position of the matrix is reversed.
I nserting and Curing the Composite. For most Class
IV preparations a polyester strip matrix is used as previously described. Following application of the bonding
adhesive (if not already applied), insert the composite
either with a hand instrument or syringe as described
earlier for Class III restorations. Light-cured composite is
inserted and cured in 1- to 2-mm increments. Care must

FIG. 12-40

be taken when closing the strip not to pull with excessive force because the soft material will be extruded incisally and result in an undercontoured restoration. If
this happens, add composite to restore proper contour
and contact.
A compound-supported matrix as previously described
may be necessary for large Class IV tooth preparations.
When restoring with a self-cured composite, insertion is
best accomplished by injecting the material with a syringe. Care must be taken to provide a slight excess of
material at the exposed margins to ensure proper contour of the restoration after finishing. A light-cured composite also can be used with a compound-supported
matrix for a Class IV restoration. After the bonding adhesive has been applied and cured, insert the composite
and cure in increments to ensure complete polymerization and to possibly reduce the effects of polymerization shrinkage. Insertion is best accomplished with a
hand instrument, although a syringe can be used. Because light-cured composites possess the advantage of
an extended working time, the material can be manipulated and shaped to a considerable degree before curing. Following polymerization, remove the supporting
compound and strip. To ensure optimal polymerization, then cure the restoration from both facial and lingual directions.

Compound-supported metal matrix. A, Class IV tooth preparation to be re-

stored. B, Dead-soft metal matrix strip is positioned interproximally. C, Metal matrix
strip is adapted to lingual margin of tooth preparation. Note that strip extends over lingual margin but does not cover all of lingual surface of the tooth. D, Proximal contour
of matrix is inspected incisally. E, Toothpick having a small amount of softened impression compound on its tip is positioned interproximally. F, Compound is applied
from lingual approach to matrix and tooth; the back of a warmed spoon excavator can
then be used from facial approach to make any necessary corrections to lingual and
proximal contours of matrix strip. G, Finished compound-supported matrix with facial
access.

C H A PT E R

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

Contouring and Polishing the Composite. Contouring and finishing the Class IV composite is similar to
that described for a Class III composite, except more difficult. The primary difference is the involvement of the
incisal corner and edge of the tooth. Contouring and polishing this part of the restoration requires similar procedural steps and close assessment of the incisal edge
length and thickness. Also, the potential occlusal relationship may be greater and require more adjustment
and refinement.
Thus the facial, lingual, and proximal areas will be
contoured and finished as described previously.
CLINICAL TECHNIQUE FOR CLASS
V COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS
The clinical indications for using composite for restoring Class V areas relate to all the benefits of bonded
composite restorations. However, because isolation of
the operating site may be very difficult in cervical areas,
esthetically prominent teeth may be more appropriate
for composite use than nonesthetic areas. Microfill composites may be selected for restoring Class V defects because their composition results in: (1) increased restoration smoothness, and (2) restoration flexibility when the
tooth undergoes cervical flexure. It is thought the microfill composite restoration can flex, rather than debond,
when the tooth flexes under heavy occlusal forces . 3
I NITIAL CLINICAL PROCEDURES

Anesthesia is usually necessary when restoring a Class
V lesion. Before the tooth preparation is initiated, select
the shade of the composite material, as previously discussed, and then isolate the operating area. During
shade selection remember that the tooth is darker in the
cervical third. Isolation may be achieved by a rubber
dam and No. 212 retainer or with a cotton roll(s) and retraction cord as previously described in Chapter 10. Often cotton roll and/or retraction cord isolation is used.
TOOTH PREPARATION

Class V tooth preparations, by definition, are located in
the gingival one third of the facial and lingual tooth surfaces. Because of esthetic considerations, composite materials most frequently are used for the restoration of
Class V lesions in anterior teeth. Numerous factors must
be taken into consideration in material selection, including esthetics, caries activity, access to the lesion, moisture
control, and patient age. In fact, increased patient age is
particularly important when considering the treatment
of Class V root-surface lesions (see Chapter 9).
As stated in Chapter 1, the older adult component of
the U.S. population will continue to increase. Furthermore, older adults will retain more of their teeth and experience gingival recession as they age. With more older
adults having more root surfaces exposed, the prevalence of root caries and/or cervical erosion or abrasion

defects will increase. Therefore the number of indicated
Class V restorations also will increase. Because most of
these restorative needs will involve root surfaces, careful consideration should be given to the restorative material to be used. The consideration for use of materials
other than composite is intensified when it is realized
that the older patient may present other factors that further complicate the use of composite on the root surfaces. These factors would include decreased salivary
function, decreased motivation and ability for homecare,
increased difficulty in adequately isolating the operating
area, and increased difficulty in performing the operative
procedure because of the patient's physical or medical
problems. In spite of these concerns, the use of composite as a restorative material for Class V lesions will still
predominate in areas of esthetic concern. Subsequently,
the various tooth-preparation options are presented.
Conventional Class V Tooth Preparation. The conventional Class V tooth preparation for composite is indicated for that portion of a carious lesion or defect entirely or partially on the facial or lingual root surface of
a tooth. The preparation form would be similar to that
described in Chapter 18 (Class V Amalgam). The features of the preparation include a 90-degree cavosurface
angle; uniform depth of the axial line angles; and, sometimes, groove retention form.
Because many Class V carious lesions or defects will
have some enamel at the incisal (occlusal) and possibly
the mesial and/or distal margins, the conventional composite tooth preparation design is indicated only for the
portion of the lesion or defect extending onto the root
surface. The enamel marginal areas are prepared using
either a beveled conventional or modified preparation
design as described in the following sections of this chapter. However, occasionally a Class V lesion/defect is located entirely on the root of the tooth requiring the use
of a conventional preparation design exclusively. The
following description of a conventional tooth preparation pertains to such a restoration that is located entirely
on the root surface of a tooth (Fig. 12-41, A).
A tapered fissure carbide bur (No. 700, 701, or 271) or
similarly shaped diamond is used at high speed with
air-water spray. If access interproximally or gingivally is
limited, a No. 1 or No. 2 round bur or diamond may be
used to prepare the tooth. When a tapered fissure bur or
diamond is used, make entry at a 45-degree angle to the
tooth surface by tilting the handpiece distally; however,
as the cutting progresses distally, maneuver the handpiece to thereafter maintain the bur's long axis perpendicular to the external surface of the tooth during preparation of the outline form, which should result in
90-degree cavosurface margins. At this initial tooth preparation stage, the extensions in every direction are to
sound tooth structure, except the axial depth should
only be 0.75 mm (see Fig. 12-41, B). The tip of the bur
may be rotating in air, caries, or old restorative material

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

FIG 12-41

Conventional Class V tooth preparation. A, Lesion entirely on root surface. B, Initial tooth preparation
with 90-degree cavosurface margins and axial wall depth
of 0.75 mm. C, Remaining infected dentin excavated and
i ncisal and gingival retention form prepared.

while establishing this initial depth. Any infected dentin
remaining on this initial axial wall will be removed during the final stage of tooth preparation. Any old restorative material remaining may or may not be removed according to the concepts stated previously. The 0.75 mm
axial wall depth will provide adequate external wall
width for: (1) strength of the preparation wall; (2) strength
of the composite; and (3) placement of a retention
groove, if necessary. When the desired distal extension
is obtained, move the bur mesially, incisally (occlusally),
and gingivally for indicated extensions, while maintaining the proper initial depth and keeping the bur's long
axis perpendicular to the root surface. The axial wall
should follow the original contour of the facial surface,
which is convex outward mesiodistally and sometimes
occlusogingivally The outline form extension of the mesial, distal, occlusal (incisal), and gingival walls is dictated by the extent of the caries, defect, or old restorative material indicated for replacement (sometimes the
new material will abut a still satisfactory, old restoration). All of the external preparation walls of a Class V
conventional tooth preparation are visible when viewed
from a facial position (outwardly divergent walls).
Final tooth preparation for the conventional preparation consists of the following steps: (1) removing remaining infected dentin or old restorative material (if indicated) on the axial wall; (2) applying a calcium hydroxide
liner, only if necessary; and (3) sometimes preparing
groove retention form.
If retention grooves are necessary, they are prepared
with a No. 1/4 bur along the full length of the gingivoaxial and incisoaxial (occlusoaxial) line angles. These
grooves are prepared 0.25 mm in depth into the external
walls and next to the axial wall at an angle that bisects
the junction between the axial wall and the gingival or
occlusal (or incisal) wall. This should leave, between the
groove and the margin, sufficient remaining wall dimension (0.25 mm) to prevent fracture (see Fig. 12-41, C). It
is helpful while preparing the grooves to observe that
this remaining wall dimension is equal to half the di-

ameter of the bur head (which is 0.5 mm). Clean the
preparation, if indicated, and inspect for final approval.
Beveled Conventional Class V Tooth Preparation.
The beveled conventional Class V tooth preparation
has beveled enamel margins and is indicated either for:
(1) the replacement of an existing, defective Class V restoration that initially used a conventional preparation
or (2) for a large, new carious lesion. The beveled conventional Class V preparation initially will exhibit 90degree cavosurface margins (that subsequently will be
beveled) and an axial wall that is uniform in depth (see
Fig. 12-9, E and F). The axial depth into dentin is only
0.2 mm when groove retention is judged unnecessary
and 0.5 mm when a retention groove is planned and the
margin is still in enamel. However, groove retention
usually is not indicated when the periphery of the tooth
preparation is located in enamel. Many of these larger
preparations will be a combination of beveled enamel
margins and 90-degree root-surface (nonenamel) margins, with the root-surface areas having groove retention. Thus they are combined beveled conventional and
conventional preparations. As stated previously, for the
preparation portion on the root surface, the depth of the
axial wall should be 0.75 mm.
The advantages of the beveled conventional tooth
preparation as compared to the conventional tooth preparation are: (1) increased retention due to the greater surface area of etched enamel afforded by the bevel, (2) decreased microleakage due to the enhanced bond between
the composite and the tooth, and (3) decreased need for
groove retention form (and consequently less removal of
tooth structure).
The typical outline form for a Class V lesion in enamel
is seen in Fig. 12-42. Prepare the outline form as described in the preceding section with the initial axial
wall depth only 0.2 mm into dentin when groove retention is unnecessary (Fig. 12-43).
Complete the following steps of final tooth preparation: (1) remove any remaining infected dentin, and, if
indicated, remove any old restorative material; (2) apply

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

a calcium hydroxide liner, but only if necessary; (3) usually prepare a gingival retention groove if either the gingival margin is located on the root surface or the preparation is large enough to warrant groove retention form;
and (4) bevel the enamel margins. The bevel on the
enamel margin is accomplished with a flame-shaped or
round diamond instrument, resulting in an angle approximately 45 degrees to the external tooth surface and prepared to a width of 0.25 to 0.5 mm. A completed beveled
conventional Class V preparation is shown in Fig. 12-44.
An even more conservative approach may be used
when extending the outline form of beveled conventional Class V preparations. Fig. 12-18, A, illustrates a
path of a decalcified enamel lesion (in enamel only) having a broken, rough surface that extends mesially
and/or distally from the cavitated lesion (or failing existing restoration). After preparation of the cavitated le-

FIG 12-42

FIG . 12-43

sion (or failing restoration), extend the margins of the
preparation to include these areas of decalcification by
using a round diamond instrument to prepare the cavosurface margin in the form of a chamfer, extended only
in the enamel to a depth that removes the defect. A completed beveled conventional preparation of this type is
illustrated in Fig. 12-18, B.
When a large Class V carious lesion or faulty restoration extends onto the root surface, the gingival wall is
prepared in the same manner as a conventional Class V
tooth preparation (i.e., butt joint, usually with a dentinal
retention groove). The depth of the initial preparation
on the root surface should be only 0.75 mm. Only the
enamel cavosurface margins are beveled. A completed
combination of a Class V beveled conventional with a
conventional tooth preparation extending onto the root
surface is illustrated in Fig. 12-45.

A, Class V caries. B, Typical outline form.

I nitiating a beveled conventional Class V tooth preparation. A, Operating position
and equipment. Entry with No. 701 bur or tapered diamond held at 45-degree angle to tooth surface. B, As cutting proceeds distally (0.2 mm into dentin), bur shank is held perpendicular to
enamel surface. C, Mesial extension, keeping bur shank perpendicular to surface and maintaini ng initial depth.

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

Modified Class V Tooth Preparation. The modified
Class V tooth preparation is indicated for the restoration
of small and moderate Class V lesions or defects. The
objective is to restore the lesion or defect as conservatively as possible. Therefore, there is no effort to prepare
the walls as butt joints and usually no groove retention
is incorporated. The lesion or defect is "scooped" out,
resulting in a preparation form that may have a divergent wall configuration and an axial surface that usually
is not uniform in depth (see Fig. 12-16, E and F). Class V
modified preparations are ideal for small enamel defects
or small, but cavitated lesions that are largely or entirely
in enamel (Fig. 12-46, A). These include decalcified and
hypoplastic areas located in the cervical one third of the
teeth.
After the usual preliminary procedures, prepare initial
tooth preparation with a round or elliptical diamond instrument (see Fig. 12-46, B), eliminating all of the enamel
lesion or defect. The preparation is only extended into
dentin when the defect warrants such extension, and at
this initial stage is prepared no deeper than 0.2 mm into
dentin (because no groove retention form will be used).
No effort is made to prepare 90-degree cavosurface
margins.
If infected dentin remains, it is removed with a round
bur or spoon excavator. Apply a calcium hydroxide
liner, but only if indicated. The completed preparation
with etched enamel and etched and primed dentin can
be seen in Fig. 12-46, C.

FIG 12-44

Completed
preparation.

l arge beveled conventional Class V

Class V Tooth Preparation for Abrasion/Erosion
Lesions. Class V modified tooth preparations also are

used to restore abraded or eroded cervical areas. Abrasion, in the form of a notch, often V-shaped, is a loss or
wearing away of tooth structure due to mechanical
forces, such as strenuous toothbrushing with a hard
bristle toothbrush or abrasive toothpaste. Erosion, often a saucer-shaped notch, occurs primarily as a result
of chemical dissolution (e.g., sustained exposure to citric
acid [juices] or vomitus). Idiopathic erosion or abfraction may occur as a result of flexure of the cervical area
under heavy occlusal stress, beginning with microfrac-

FIG 12-46

FIG 12-45

Completed Class V tooth preparation extending
onto the root; crown portion beveled conventional design;
root portion conventional design.

Modified Class V tooth preparation. A, Small cavitated Class V lesion. B, Surroundi ng enamel defect is prepared with round diamond instrument. C, Completed modified tooth
preparation after acid-etching.

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

A

FIG . 12-47

Class V tooth preparation for abrasion/erosion lesions. A, Preoperative notched lesion.
B through D, Beveling the enamel margin, roughening the internal walls, and placing retention
groove. E, Completed preparation with etched enamel.

ture of the thin enamel tooth structure occlusal of the
cementoenamel junction, which, when combined with
abrasive toothbrushing, could produce a "notched" defect. These notches are progressive, enlarging with time
if the causative factor is not eliminated.
When notching occurs (Fig 12-47, A) the operator first
must decide, with input from the patient, whether or not
the area needs to be restored. This decision is based on
the considerations discussed in the following sections.
Caries. If caries is present, the defect should be restored unless the lesion is incipient and very superficial.
For the incipient root-caries lesion, treatment may consist only of minor recontouring of the area (cementoplasty) and application of a topical fluoride or bonding
adhesive. (Most erosion and abrasion notches are not
carious.)
Gingival Health. If the notched defect is determined
to be causing gingival inflammation (i.e., plaque retention) and/or further gingival recession is anticipated,
the notched defect should be restored. (Usually, however, gingival health is excellent, with the notching having occurred after gingival recession.)
Esthetics. If the notched area is in an esthetically critical position, the patient may elect to have the area restored with a tooth-colored restoration.
Sensitivity. If the notched area is very sensitive, application of a dentin bonding agent or desensitizing
agent may, at least temporarily, reduce or eliminate the
sensitivity. Continuing sensitivity may require restoration of the area.
Pulp Protection. If the notched area is very large and
deep pulpally, the restoration of the defect may be indi-

cated to avoid further defect development that may
cause a pulpal exposure.
Tooth Strength. If the notched area is very large or
deep, the strength of the tooth at the cervical area may
be compromised. Placement of a bonded restoration
will eliminate further progression of the defect and may
restore some of the lost strength.
The tooth preparation for a Class V abrasion or erosion
area usually requires only roughening of the internal
walls with a diamond instrument; beveling or flaring all
enamel margins; and, sometimes, placing a retention
groove in nonenamel areas (see Fig. 12-47, A through C).
If necessary, prepare the root-surface cavosurface margins to approximately 90 degrees. Often the inherent form
of an abraded/eroded lesion will result in no need for
further preparation of root-surface cavosurface margins.
Although success may be obtained without placement of
the groove retention form, greater restoration retention
may be provided when the retentive groove is utilized.
Moreover, greater resistance to marginal leakage results
from groove placement, because this retentive feature assists in resisting the effects of polymerization shrinkage
and tooth flexure.' The completed preparation with
etched enamel is seen in Fig. 12-47, E.
Tooth Preparation for Aberrant Smooth Surface
Pit Fault. Occasionally a tooth surface that normally is
smooth will have a pit in the enamel (Fig. 12-48, A).
Most aberrant pit faults in enamel are restored best with
use of a modified preparation. For such a preparation for
an aberrant pit fault, the outline form (includes extensions and depth) is dictated by the extent of the fault
and/or caries lesion. Faults existing entirely in enamel

CHAPTER

12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

A

B

FIG 12-48 A, Faulty pit on facial surface of maxillary incisor. B, Modified tooth preparation for
enamel pit defect.

are prepared with an appropriately sized round diamond instrument by merely eliminating the defect (see
Fig. 12-48, B). Adequate retention is obtained by etching
the enamel (the first step in applying restorative materials). When the defect includes carious dentin, the infected portion is removed also, leaving a flared enamel
margin.

RESTORATIVE TECHNIQUE
No matrix is needed for restoring preparations for which
the contour can be controlled as the composite restorative material is being inserted, such as in the Class V
restoration. This is especially true when using a lightcured material that has an extended working time, which
permits the operator to initiate contouring of the restoration in the unpolymerized state.
Etching, Priming, and Placing Adhesive. The etching, priming, and placement of adhesive techniques are
the same as previously described.
I nserting and Curing the Composite. A self-cured
or light-cured composite can be inserted with a hand instrument or syringe. Self-cured composites are seldom
used for Class V restorations because of the advantages
of light-cured composites. In spite of that, the following
describes the use of self-cured composites for Class V
restorations. Recall that microfill composites also may
be recommended for Class V restorations.
Because no matrix is used, care must be exercised to
avoid having excess bonding adhesive because it tends
to act as a lubricant within the preparation, and makes
insertion more difficult. Wipe a small portion of mixed
self-cured composite into the preparation with the blade

of the hand instrument and vibrate to place with the
plugger end. The tip can be lubricated with a sparing
amount of bonding adhesive. Usually a second increment is needed and sufficient to slightly overfill the preparation. Remove the excess first at the gingival cavosurface margin with the tine of a No. 2 explorer or the blade
of a composite instrument, the tip of which is on unprepared tooth structure, gingival to the prepared margin.
If the composite begins to harden before contouring is
complete, further contouring should not be attempted
at this stage.
A light-cured material is recommended for most
Class V preparations because of the extended working
time and control of contour before polymerization. Less
finishing is usually required. This feature is particularly
valuable when restoring large preparations or preparations with margins located on cementum, because rotary
instrumentation can easily damage contiguous tooth
structure.
The restoration of an abrasion/ erosion lesion (Fig.
12-49, A) will illustrate proper insertion technique for
a light-cured material. Following etching and priming
steps for enamel and dentin (per manufacturer's instructions), place a thin layer of bonding adhesive and cure
(see Fig. 12-49, B). Then insert the composite incrementally with a hand instrument or syringe (see Fig. 12-49,
C). Fill deep preparations having retentive undercuts in
at least two increments. First, insert a small amount of
material in the retentive undercuts and cure. Second, fill
the outer portion of the preparation and shape the material as close to the final contour as possible. An explorer or blade of a composite instrument is useful in

C H A PT E R 12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

FIG 12-49 Restoration of abrasion/erosion lesion. A, Tooth preparation. B, Bonding adhesive
applied. C, Material inserted incrementally. D, Restoration cured with visible light source.

removing excess material from the cervical margin and
obtaining the final contour. Then apply the light source
for polymerization (see Fig. 12-49, D). The restoration
should require very little finishing.
Contouring and Polishing the Composite. A flameshaped carbide finishing bur or polishing diamond is
recommended for removing excess composite on the facial surface of a Class V composite (see Fig. 12-33, A). Use
medium speed with light intermittent brush strokes and
an air coolant for contouring. Final finishing and polishing are achieved with a rubber polishing point (see
Fig. 12-33, B) or cup and, sometimes, an aluminum oxide polishing paste (see Fig. 12-33, C and D).
For some locations, abrasive discs, as stated earlier,
(degree of abrasiveness depends on the amount of excess to be removed) mounted on an appropriate mandrel in an angle handpiece at low speed can be used (see
Fig. 12-34, A). The disc is rotated at low speed. The external enamel surface should act as a guide for proper
contour. A constant shifting motion will aid in contouring and preventing the development of a flat surface. A
fine-grit disc is used for final polishing.
Use rotary instruments very carefully in gingival locations (especially on the root surface) to prevent inadvertent and undesirable removal of tooth structure (usually
cementum and dentin). Finely pointed rotary instruments (finishing burs or diamonds) are difficult to use to
remove gingival margin excess. Because of the convexity
that typically exists in this area, a more rounded rotary
instrument (a fine diamond) may remove the excess with
less potential to damage the unprepared root surface.
Likewise, sandpaper or polishing discs used on the root

surface can cause ditching of the cementum if not used
correctly.
MICROFILL COMPOSITE
RESTORATIONS
Microfill composites are indicated primarily for small
Class 111, Class V, and partial veneer restorations. They
are not typically used for Class I or Class 11 restorations
because, even though some may have good wear resistance, they may have a greater tendency to fracture under
occlusal load. The advantage of the microfill composite is
that it is very esthetic, very smooth, and tends to flex with
the tooth when used in abfracture lesions.
The disadvantage of these materials is that because of
decreased filler amount, their physical properties are
usually not as good as hybrid composites.

CLINICAL TECHNIQUE
The clinical technique for a microfill composite is very
similar to a composite restoration. The initial considerations, tooth preparation, and most of the restorative technique are similar. The differences are that the microfill
composite, because it is more viscous, is not as injectable
as other composites, and contouring and finishing procedures are slightly different.
Although generally the same technique used for finishing conventional and hybrid composites apply to finishing microfill composites, certain differences do exist.
Conventional and hybrid composites exhibit an opaque
appearance during dry finishing, making the preparation margin easy to distinguish. Because microfill composites possess a surface luster similar to that of tooth

C H A P T E R 12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

enamel, it is more difficult to detect when the restoration
has been finished back to the margin. Also, because less
inorganic filler is present in microfill composites, finishing burs tend to clog and need periodic debridement.
Although conventional finishing techniques produce
a smooth surface texture with microfill composites, a
higher luster can be attained by using various discs,
rubber points, or cups that are specifically made for polishing these materials.

GLASS-IONOMER RESTORATIONS
As noted earlier, glass ionomers possess the favorable
quality of releasing fluoride when exposed to the oral environment."' This property may render glass-ionomer
restorations more resistant to recurrent caries. Because
of this potential anticariogenic quality, glass ionomer
may be the material of choice for restoring root-surface
caries in patients with high caries activity and where esthetics is not as critical. (See Chapter 4 for types of glass
ionomers and compomers.)
Both self-cured and light-cured versions of glass ionomers are available. Resin-modified, light-cured glass
ionomers are preferred because of both the extended
working time and their improved physical properties
and esthetic qualities. Also, resin-modified, light-cured
glass ionomers tend to be more resistant to dehydration
and cracking during setting than are conventional selfcured versions.
Conventional glass ionomers are not as esthetic as
composite restorations, and glass ionomers are not usually recommended for use in areas of significant esthetic
concern. However, resin-modified, light-cured versions
of glass ionomers and compomers (poly-acid-modified
composites) contain some resin and possess improved
esthetic qualities, as well as other improved physical
properties. In fact, these types of materials may be used
in some esthetically demanding areas.
Because of their limited strength and wear resistance, glass ionomers are indicated generally for the
restoration of low stress areas (not for typical Classes I,
II, or IV restorations), where caries activity potential is
of significant concern. In addition to glass ionomers
being indicated for root-surface caries in Class V locations, slot-like preparations in either Classes II or III
cervical locations (not involving the proximal contact)
may be restored with glass ionomers if access permits.
The restoration of root-caries lesions in older patients
or those with high caries activity is the primary indication for the use of glass ionomer. Notched cervical defects of idiopathic erosion, or abrasion origin (or any
combination) also are well-suited for restoration with
glass ionomers, if esthetic demands are not critical. The
tooth preparations for either of these clinical indications are the same as previously described for composite restorations (see Figs. 12-41, 12-45, and 12-47). Older

patients and those with high caries activity who have
gingival recession also may experience carious lesions
on the proximal root surfaces. Gingival recession sometimes provides access to this type of carious lesion from
the facial or lingual direction, allowing a slot preparation to be used. The same slot preparation design used
for amalgam is used for glass ionomers. (The reader is
referred to the section on slot preparations in Chapters
13 and 17 and Fig. 12-4 for specific details.) With the exception of the matrix utilized (if needed), slot preparations for Classes II and III restorations are restored in a
similar manner to a Class V preparation.

CLINICAL TECHNIQUE
Following preparation of the tooth, deeply excavated
areas (within 0.5 mm of the pulp) may need protection
with a calcium hydroxide liner. Most conventional glassionomer systems require etching the dentinal surfaces
to remove the smear layer, thereby effecting improved
adhesion of the glass ionomer to the dentin. To etch the
dentin, a mild acid such as 10% polyacrylic acid is
placed in the preparation for approximately 20 seconds,
followed by rinsing and removal of excess water, leaving the dentin moist. It should be noted that not all
glass-ionomer systems require dentin etching. Additionally, some resin-modified glass ionomers and all compomers use an intermediary bonding agent to facilitate
bonding. Each glass-ionomer and compomer system
should be used strictly according to the manufacturer's
specific instructions.
Most conventional glass-ionomer systems are quite
technique sensitive. Original glass ionomers usually
required carefully mixing a powder and liquid within
30 seconds to optimize powder incorporation (higher
powder/liquid ratio). Encapsulated versions for triturator mixing are available also. Such systems are recommended because they optimize and simplify the mixing
procedure and facilitate insertion through direct injection into the preparation.
Self-cured glass-ionomer material should be placed
into the preparation in slight excess and quickly shaped
with a composite instrument. Clear plastic cervical matrices also are available for providing contour to the
restoration. If a conventional type of glass ionomer is
used, place a thin coat of light-cured resin bonding agent
on the surface immediately after placement to prevent
dehydration and cracking of the restoration during the
initial setting phase. As noted earlier, new light-cured
hybrid type glass ionomers are more resistant to dehydration and do not typically require this step. If a resinmodified, light-cured glass ionomer is used, cure for a
minimum time of 40 seconds.
Conventional versions of glass ionomers ideally require a polymerization period of 24 hours before final
contouring and finishing. However, most resin-modified,

C H A P T E R 12

Classes III, IV, and V Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

A

B

FIG 12-50 Glass-ionomer cement. Three typical light-cured glass-ionomer restorations are
shown before (A) and after (B) treatment.

light-cured glass ionomers available can be contoured
and finished immediately after light-curing. (The manufacturer's recommendations should be followed to optimize clinical performance of the material.) Once the material has set, the matrix, if used, is removed and the gross
excess is shaved away with either a No. 12 surgical blade
in a Bard-Parker handle or other appropriately shaped
knives or scalers. As much as possible of the contouring
and finishing should be accomplished with hand instruments, while striving to preserve the smooth surface
that occurs upon setting. If rotary instrumentation is
needed, care must be taken not to dehydrate the surface
of the restoration. Micron finishing diamonds used with
a petroleum lubricant to prevent desiccation are ideal
for contouring and finishing conventional glass ionomers.
Also, flexible abrasive discs used with a lubricant can be
very effective. A fine grit aluminum oxide polishing paste
applied with a prophy cup is used to impart a smooth
surface. Three typical resin-modified, light-cured glassionomer restorations are shown before and after treatment in Fig. 12-50, A and B.
SUMMARY
This chapter presents techniques and rationales for the
use of composite and other tooth-colored materials for
Classes III, IV, and V restorations. It should be apparent
that composite is the material of choice for most Class
III and Class IV restorations and most esthetically demanding Class V restorations. When done correctly,
composite restorations provide excellent dental treat-

ment in those clinical situations. Common problems,
potential solutions, and repair techniques for these
types of restorations were presented in Chapter 11.
REFERENCES
1. Dilts WE, Podshadley A, Neiman R: Effect of pins on some
physical characteristics of composite resins, J Am Dent Assoc
87:595, 1973.
2. Ehrnford L, Derand: Cervical gap formation in Class 11 composite resin restorations, Swed Dent j 8:15-19, 1984.
3. Heymann HO et al: Examining tooth flexure effects on cervical restorations: a two-year clinical study, jAm Dent Assoc 122:
41-47,1991.
4. Jaarvinen VK, Ryt6maa II, Heinonen OP: Risk factors in dental erosion, j Dent Res 70(6):942-947,1991.
5. Lee WC, Eakle WS: Possible role of tensile stress in the etiology of cervical erosive lesions of teeth, J Prosthet Dent 52(3):
374-380,1984.
6. Mair LH: Wear in dentistry: current terminology, J Dent 20:
140-144,1992.
7. Monteiro S Jr et al: Evaluation of materials and techniques
for restoration of erosion areas, J Prosthet Dent 55:434-442,
1986.
8. Mount GJ: Adhesion of glass-ionomer cement in the clinical
environment, Oper Dent 16:141-148,1991.
9. Silverstone LM, Dogan IL, editors: Proceedings of the international symposium on the acid etch technique, St Paul, Minn,
1975, North Central Publishing.
10. Swift EJ Jr: Effects of glass ionomers on recurrent caries, Oper
Dent 14:40-43, 1989.
11. Torstenson B, Brannstrom M: Composite resin contraction
gaps measured with a fluorescent resin technique, Dent Mater
4:238-242, 1988.

I.

II.

III.

Classes I, II, and VI composite restorations, 539
A. Pertinent material qualities and properties, 539
B. Indications, 539
C. Contraindications, 539
D. Advantages, 540
E. Disadvantages, 540
Pit-and-fissure sealants, preventive resin and
conservative composite restorations, and Class VI
composite restorations, 540
A. Pit-and-fissure sealants, 541
1. Indications for sealants, 541
2. Clinical technique, 541
B. Conservative composite and preventive resin
restorations, 542
C. Class VI composite restorations, 543
Clinical technique for direct Class I composite
restorations, 544
A. Initial clinical procedures, 544
B. Tooth preparation, 544
1. Conventional Class I tooth preparation, 545
2. Modified Class I tooth preparation, 547

I V.

V.

VI.

C. Restorative technique, 548
1. Etching, priming, and placing adhesive, 548
2. Inserting and curing the composite, 549
3. Contouring and polishing the
composite, 550
Clinical technique for direct Class II composite
restorations, 550
A. Initial clinical procedures, 550
B. Tooth preparation, 551
1. Conventional Class II tooth preparation, 551
2. Modified Class II tooth preparation, 557
C. Restorative technique, 558
1. Etching, priming, and placing adhesive, 558
2. Matrix application, 558
3. Inserting and curing the composite, 560
4. Contouring and polishing the
composite, 561
Clinical technique for extensive Class II composite restorations and foundations, 563
A. Clinical technique, 564
Summary, 567

CHAPTER

13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

CLASSES I, II, AND VI COMPOSITE
RESTORATIONS
This chapter presents information about typical Classes
I, II, and VI composite restorations (Fig. 13-1). Posterior
composite restorations were introduced in the mid1960s. Because of the improved physical properties
of composite and bonding systems, 4,14,26,29,30 studies continuously reported encouraging results for their use in
posterior teeth
Further improvements have demonstrated that many Class I and Class II restorations are
now indications for composite use. In fact, the American
Dental Association (ADA)2 has indicated the appropriateness of composites for use as pit-and-fissure sealants,
preventive resins, and Classes I and II restorations for
both initial and moderately sized lesions, using modified conservative tooth preparations. If composites are
used as recommended, the ADA further states that
"when used correctly in the primary and permanent
dentition, the expected lifetime of resin-based composites can be comparable to that of amalgam in Class I,
Class 11, and Class V restorations."'
Before presenting the technique for Classes I and 11
composite restorations, the following sections provide
reasons for their increased usage. This chapter also presents information and techniques for other treatment
modalities involving the direct restoration of occlusal
surfaces of posterior teeth. These include pit-and-fissure
sealants, preventive resin or conservative composite
restorations, Class VI restorations, extensive Class II
restorations, and foundations.

not only is retained well in the tooth, but also strengthens the remaining unprepared tooth structure. Classes I
and II composite restorations also have all the other
bonding benefits presented in Chapter 11.
I NDICATIONS
The following clinical indications are for composite
restorations in Classes I and II.

.

PERTINENT MATERIAL QUALITIES
AND PROPERTIES
As presented in Chapter 11, composite is a material that
has sufficient strength for Class I and Class II restorations. It is insulative and therefore does not require pulpal protection with bases. Because composite is bonded
to the enamel and dentin, tooth preparations for composite can be very conservative. A composite restoration

1. Small and moderate restorations, preferably with
enamel margins
2. Most premolar or first molar restorations, particularly when esthetics is considered
3. A restoration that does not provide all of the occlusal
contacts
4. A restoration that does not have heavy occlusal
contacts
5. A restoration that can be appropriately isolated during the procedure
6. Some restorations that may serve as foundations for
crowns
7. Some very large restorations that are used to
strengthen remaining weakened tooth structure (for
economic or interim use reasons)
CONTRAINDICATIONS
Classes I and 11 composites may be contraindicated for
restorations in the following instances:
1. When the operating site cannot be appropriately
isolated
2. With heavy occlusal stresses
3. With all the occlusal contacts only on composite
4. In restorations that extend onto the root surface (see
next paragraph.)
The extension onto the root surface (no marginal enamel)
may be a contraindication for a composite restoration. For
many extensions onto the root surface with composite

B

D
FIG

13-1 Composite restorations. A and B, Class I composite, before and after. C and D,
Class 11 composite, before and after.

CHAPTER

13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

restorations, a V-shaped gap (contraction gap) is formed
between the root and the composite.9 This contraction
gap occurs because the force of polymerization shrinkage
of the composite is greater than the initial bond strength
of the composite to the dentin of the root. The V-shaped
gap is probably composed of composite on the restoration
side and hybridized dentin on the root side, as seen in
Fig. 13-2. It is not known what the long-term clinical
effects of these gaps may be. Regardless, it should be recognized that whenever a restoration extends onto the root
surface there maybe negative effects for the restoration no
matter what restorative material is being used. For example, even high copper amalgam restorations will exhibit
some marginal leakage, at least for a short period of time.
Thus any extension onto the root surface requires the best
and most meticulous efforts of the operator to best ensure
a successful, long-lasting restoration.

ADVANTAGES
The advantages of composite as a Class I or Class 11
restorative material are:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Esthetics
Conservative tooth structure removal
Easier, less complex tooth preparation
Economics (compared to crowns and indirect toothcolored restorations)
5. Insulation
6. Bonding benefits
• Decreased microleakage
• Decreased recurrent caries
• Decreased postoperative sensitivity
• Increased retention
• Increased strength of remaining tooth structure3,16

DISADVANTAGES
The disadvantages of Class I and Class 11 composite
restorations are:
1. Material related
• Greater localized wear 7,17
• Polymerization shrinkage effects
• Linear coefficient of thermal expansion (LCTE) 8
• Biocompatibility of some components unknown

FIG 13-2 Contraction gap. A, V-shaped gap on
root surface. B, Restoration-side vector is composite; root-side vector is hybridized dentin.

A

2. Require more time to place
3. More technique sensitive
• Etching, priming, adhesive placement
• Inserting composite
• Developing proximal contacts
• Finishing and polishing
4. More expensive than amalgam restorations
This chapter presents the techniques for treating the
occlusal and proximal areas of posterior teeth with composite and other directly placed tooth-colored materials.
The least invasive treatments are presented first, followed by progressively more involved methods of treatment. Consequently, first the rationale and technique
for pit-and-fissure sealants, preventive resin or conservative composite restorations, and Class VI composite
restorations are presented. Next, the typical Class I and
Class II composite restorations are presented, followed
by more extensive Class 11 restorations, including composite foundations.

PIT-AND-FISSURE SEALANTS,
PREVENTIVE RESIN AND
CONSERVATIVE COMPOSITE
RESTORATIONS, AND CLASS VI
COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS
As detailed in Chapter 9, before any treatment is rendered, a thorough diagnosis must be made and many
factors assessed. In assessing the occlusal surfaces of
posterior teeth, the primary decision is whether or not a
cavitated lesion exists. This decision is based on a radiographic and clinical examination. Remember from Chapters 3, 6, and 9 that explorers must be used very judiciously in the detection of caries, otherwise the explorer
tine may actually cause a cavitation, possibly resulting
in the necessity to restore rather than remineralize the
lesion. The clinical examination is better focused on visual assessments. Therefore the following questions
about occlusal surfaces should be addressed:
1. Is there chalkiness of the tooth structure at the base of
the pit or groove?
2. Is there softening in the tooth structure at the base of
the pit or groove?

CHAPTER

13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

3. Is there brown-gray discoloration radiating peripherally from the pit or groove?
4. Is there radiolucency beneath the enamel surface on
the radiograph?
5. Is the patient at high risk for caries?
The interpretation of the answers to these assessments
may indicate demineralized, decalcified, undermined, or
carious tooth structure. Such information is critical in determining the course of treatment. When no cavitated
carious lesion is diagnosed, the treatment decision is either to pursue no treatment or place a pit-and-fissure
sealant, particularly if the surface is a high risk for future
caries. If a small carious lesion is detected and the adjacent
grooves and pits, although sound at the present time, are
at risk to caries in the future, a preventive resin restoration (PRR) or conservative composite restoration (CCR)
( which combines a small Class I composite with a sealant) may be the treatment recommendation. Before any
of these treatments are initiated, the operator must be certain that no interproximal (Class II) caries or fault exists.
PIT-AND-FISSURE SEALANTS

As noted earlier in Chapters 2, 3, and 6, pits and fissures typically result from an incomplete coalescence of
enamel and are particularly prone to caries. By using a
low-viscosity fluid resin, these areas can be sealed, following acid-etching of the walls of the pits and fissures
and a few millimeters of surface enamel bordering these
faults.
Long-term clinical studies indicate that pit-andfissure sealants provide a safe and effective method of
preventing caries .25,27 Sealants are most effective in children when they are applied to the pits and fissures of
permanent posterior teeth immediately upon eruption
of the clinical crowns. Adults also can benefit from the
use of sealants if the individual experiences a change in
caries susceptibility because of a change in their diet or
medical condition (see Chapter 3).
Sealant materials (self-cured and light-cured) are
based on urethane dimethacrylate or Bis-GMA resins.
Tints frequently are added to sealants to produce color
contrast for visual assessment.
Clinical studies also show that sealants can be applied
even over small, cavitated lesions, with no subsequent
progression of caries. '2,22 However, it is recommended
that sealants be used for the prevention of caries rather
than for the treatment of existing carious lesions. Therefore a recent bitewing radiograph should be made and
evaluated before sealant placement, to ensure no dentinal caries is evident. Only caries-free pits and fissures or
incipient lesions in enamel not extending to the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ) currently are recommended
for treatment with pit-and-fissure sealants.
I ndications for Sealants. The indications for sealants
have been presented in ADA' and Public Health" publi-

cations. Both sources indicate that, regardless of age,
caries risk of an individual should be the major factor
for selecting teeth for sealant application. Sealants may
be indicated for either preventive or therapeutic uses,
depending on the patient's caries risk, tooth morphology, or presence of incipient enamel caries.
Clinical Technique. Because materials and techniques
vary, it is important to follow the manufacturer's instructions for the sealant material being used. A standard method for applying sealants to posterior teeth is
presented. Each quadrant is treated separately and may
involve one or more teeth. The following discussion
deals with a fissure present on a mandibular first permanent molar (Fig. 13-3, A). The tooth is isolated by a
rubber dam (or cotton rolls). The isolation of the area is
critical to the success of the sealant. Because sealant placement in younger patients is more common, the molar
teeth are often not fully erupted, and therefore isolation
is difficult. If proper isolation cannot be obtained, the
bond of the sealant material to the occlusal surface will
be compromised, resulting in either loss of the sealant or
recurrent caries under the sealant. The area is cleaned
with a slurry of pumice on a bristle brush (see Fig. 13-3,
B). Bristles reach into faulty areas better than a rubber
prophy cup, which tends to burnish debris and pumice
into the pits and fissures. The tooth is rinsed thoroughly
while the explorer tip is used carefully to help remove
residual pumice or additional debris. After the area is
dried, a liquid acid etchant (35% to 50% phosphoric
acid) may be placed on the occlusal surface with a small
sponge, brush, or applicator tip for 30 seconds. Gel etchants, traditionally used for most restorative procedures,
may have less ability to effectively penetrate into the
pits and fissures. Laser cleaning and etching is an alternative to traditional techniques, but lasing units are not
yet widely available in general practice. Likewise, air
abrasion techniques also are being advocated for preparing the pits and grooves before sealant placement,
but their effectiveness has not yet warranted their additional expense.
Next, the tooth is rinsed with water for 20 seconds
while the area is evacuated, and then dried of all visible
moisture. The properly acid-etched enamel surface has
a lightly frosted appearance (see Fig. 13-3, C). Fluoriderich, resistant enamel may need to be etched longer. Any
brown stains that originally may have been in the
pits/fissures may still be present and should be allowed
to remain. The self-cured sealant is mixed and applied
with a small applicator provided in the sealant kit. The
sealant is gently teased to place, to avoid entrapping air,
and it should slightly overfill all pits and fissures. Some
operators prefer light-cured sealants, which also work
well. After polymerization of the sealant, the rubber
dam is removed, and the occlusion is evaluated using
articulating paper. If necessary, a round 12-bladed carbide finishing bur or white stone is used to remove the

CHAPTER

1 3

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

D

C

13-3 Steps in application of sealant. A, Fissure in occlusal surface of mandibular molar
with area isolated by rubber dam. B, Cleaning surface with pumice and bristle brush. C, Properly etched surface with lightly frosted appearance. D, Sealant inserted and finished. (Courtesy
FIG

of Dr. William Vann, Jr.)

excess. The surface usually does not require further polishing (see Fig. 13-3, D).
CONSERVATIVE COMPOSITE AND PREVENTIVE
RESIN RESTORATIONS
When restoring small pits and fissures on an unrestored
tooth, an ultraconservative, modified preparation design is recommended. This design allows for restoration
of the lesion or defect with minimal removal of tooth
structure and often may be combined with the use of
composite or sealant to seal radiating noncarious fissures or pits that are at high risk for subsequent caries
activity (Fig. 13-4). Originally referred to as a preventive
resin restoration, 23,24 this type of ultraconservative restoration is termed a conservative composite restoration
( CCR) at the University of North Carolina. An accurate
diagnosis is essential before restoring the occlusal surface of a posterior tooth. The critical factor in this clinical assessment is whether or not the suspicious pit or
fissure is cavitated, therefore requiring restorative intervention (see Chapter 3). After deciding that cavitation
has occurred, it usually must be determined whether to
use amalgam or composite. Important factors related to
this decision include: (1) ability to isolate the tooth or
teeth, (2) occlusal relationship, (3) esthetics, and (4) operator ability. Usually, a CCR is the treatment of choice for
the small occlusal restoration. The advantages of composite over amalgam for such restorations are: (1) conserving tooth structure, (2) enhancing esthetics, (3) bonding tooth structure together, (4) sealing the prepared
tooth structure, and (5) including other suspicious areas

Conservative composite restoration (CCR). Dotted
line indicates area to be sealed around central pit tooth
preparation.

FIG 13-4

on the occlusal surface with either the composite restorative material or a sealant material. Composite should not
be used if the area cannot be properly isolated (resulting
in an inadequate bond), or the operator does not have
the ability to place a composite restoration satisfactorily.
Sometimes, if a definitive diagnosis of caries cannot
be made, an exploratory preparation of the suspicious
area is performed with a small bur or diamond. This
approach is particularly indicated in patients at high
risk for caries. The objective of this procedure is to explore suspicious pits or grooves with a very small bur
or diamond to determine the extent of the suspected
fault. As the tooth preparation is deepened, an assess-

C H A P T E R 13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

FIG

13-5 Class I modified tooth preparation. A and B, Clinical examples of fissures and final
exploratory tooth preparations. C, Preparation is made with a No. '/Z bur or diamond. D, Initial
extensions. Pit remnants remain. E, Carious pits excavated and preparation roughened.

ment is made in the suspicious areas whether or not to
continue the preparation toward the DEJ. If the suspicious fault is removed or found to be sound at a shallow preparation depth, the area is restored with composite as described below. If the suspicious area is
found to be carious, the preparation depth is continued
until all of the caries is removed. The prepared area is
then restored with composite.
A maxillary premolar may have a fissure in the occlusal surface as illustrated in the clinical example in
Fig. 13-5, A. Although every effort should be made to
determine the presence of a cavitated lesion, if this diagnosis cannot be made, an exploratory preparation
may be considered. Fig. 13-5, B through D, shows the
initial, exploratory tooth preparation of the fissure, using a No. 1/ 2 or No. 330 bur or diamond. The initial depth
is kept in enamel at approximately 1 mm. The occlusal
extension is complete when either the occlusal aspect of
the fissure terminates or the opposite pit area is reached.
Any pulpally directed remnants of pits and fissures are
tested with a sharp explorer. If they are still defective as
evidenced by a soft feel or "stick" of the explorer, the
same bur is used to extend the preparation pulpally into

these areas. It is not necessary to extend the preparation
in a pulpal direction if only a hard, dark line remains
that cannot be penetrated by a sharp explorer, and the
radiograph is negative for dentinal caries. If necessary,
the preparation is completed by using a flame-shaped
diamond instrument to flare the cavosurface margin
(see Fig. 13-5, E). This flare may be widened to include
any terminal ends of fissures. If no radiating fissures exist, the flaring is not necessary because of the enamel
rod direction in this area, especially if steep cuspal inclines are present. The completed tooth preparation on
a maxillary premolar is illustrated in Fig. 13-5, F.

CLASS VI COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS
One of the most conservative indications for a directly
placed posterior composite is a small faulty developmental pit located on a cusp tip. Fig. 13-6, A, is an example of a Class VI fault on the facial cusp tip of a maxillary premolar and the occlusion in the area is minimal.
Usually no anesthesia is required because the fault is entirely in enamel. The tooth is isolated with a cotton roll.
The typical Class VI tooth preparation should be as
small in diameter and as shallow in depth as possible.

CHAPTER

13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

FIG 13-6 Class VI tooth preparation for composite restoration. A, Class VI preparation on the
facial cusp tip of maxillary premolar. B, Entry with small round bur or diamond. C, Preparation
roughened with diamond, if necessary.

Enter the faulty pit with a small, round bur (No. '/4 or
No. '/2) or diamond oriented perpendicular to the surface and extend pulpally to eliminate the lesion (see Fig.
13-6, B). Visual examination and probing with an explorer often reveals that the fault is limited to enamel
because the enamel in this area is quite thick. If the
preparation is not already completed at this stage, complete the preparation using either a flame-shaped or
round diamond instrument to roughen the prepared surfaces (see Fig. 13-6, C). If a faulty restoration or extensive caries is present on the cusp tip, a round bur of appropriate size is used for excavating remaining infected
dentin. Stains that appear through the translucent enamel
should be removed, otherwise they may be seen after the
composite restoration is completed. Some undermined,
but not friable, enamel may be left and bonded to the
composite.
CLINICAL TECHNIQUE
FOR DIRECT CLASS I
COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS
I NITIAL CLINICAL PROCEDURES
The same general procedures as described previously
regarding anesthesia and shade selection are necessary
before beginning a Class I composite restoration (see
Chapters 10, 11, and 12). However, an assessment of the
preoperative occlusal relationship of the tooth to be restored should be made. This information will not usually contraindicate the use of composite as the restorative
material unless all occlusal contacts will occur solely on
the restoration. Isolation of the operating area is not
usually a problem, but must be ensured for a successful
restoration.
TOOTH PREPARATION
The three typical composite preparations (conventional,
beveled conventional, and modified) also may be considered for Class I and Class II composite restorations,
although the beveled conventional design would rarely
be used. When there is need to provide increased resistance form (resistance to fracture of the tooth or compos-

ite), the more amalgam-like conventional preparation
form may be indicated. This would be most necessary
for large preparations or restorations subjected to heavy
occlusal forces. The conventional beveled design, conventional preparation design, or some combination of
the two provides boxlike form, some flat walls that are
perpendicular to occlusal forces, and strong tooth and
restoration marginal configurations. All of these features help resist potential fracture.
Small-to-moderate restorations may use modified
tooth preparations, which usually do not provide the
characteristic resistance form features previously listed.
Instead, the modified preparation typically utilizes
more flared cavosurface forms without uniform or flat
pulpal or axial walls. Usually a more rounded, and perhaps smaller, cutting instrument is used for the modified preparation, in an attempt to be as conservative as
possible in the removal of tooth structure.
Various cutting instruments may be used for Class I
and Class 11 tooth preparations, the size generally dictated by the size of the lesion or fault, and the shape dependent on retention and resistance forms needed.
Usually, however, a diamond instrument is preferred
because it roughens the prepared tooth structure, which
increases the prepared surface area and retention of the
composite to the tooth.
Composite restorations are indicated for most Class I
restorations in premolars and first molars. The larger
the restoration, the more concern about wear, although
wear resistance of composite is sufficient for most posterior restorations. Also, the further the tooth position
posteriorly, the more difficult is the isolation of the operating area, and the less is the esthetic need. Both of
these factors reduce the indication for a composite
restoration.
If the occlusal portion of the restoration is expected to
be extensive, the more boxlike preparation design may
be preferred, resulting in greater retention and resistance to fracture. This form is generated by any flattipped bur or diamond. However, inverted cone cutting
instruments with rounded corners (Fig. 13-7) may be
preferred because they: (1) provide flat floors, (2) result

C H A P T E R 13

FIG

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

13-7 Inverted cone composite preparation instruments.

A

B

FIG. 13-8 Entry cut. Diamond held parallel to long axis of
crown. Initial pulpal depth 1.5 mm from central groove.

FIG 13-9 I nitial pulpal depth. Once central groove removed, facial and lingual wall measurements will usually be greater than
1.5 mm. (The steeper the wall, the greater the height.) A, 1.5 mm
depth from central groove. B, Approximately 1.75 to 2 mm facial
or lingual wall heights.

in occlusal marginal configurations that are more representative of the strongest enamel margin, (3) enhance retention form by creating preparation walls that generally
converge occlusally, and (4) result in a more conservative faciolingual preparation width.
While the boxlike form may provide the previously
stated benefits, it also may increase the negative effects
of the C-factor. Therefore the operator must carefully
consider all of these issues in selecting the tooth preparation design.
When using the inverted cone cutting instrument,
the tooth is prepared similarly to that described for a
Class I amalgam in Chapter 17. The objective of the
tooth preparation is to remove all of the caries or fault as
conservatively as possible. Because the composite will
be bonded to the tooth structure, other less-involved, or
at-risk areas, can be sealed as part of the conservative
preparation techniques. Thus sealants may be combined

with the typical Class I composite restoration, as described already.
Conventional Class T Tooth Preparation. For the large
Class I composite tooth preparation, enter the tooth in
the distal pit area of the faulty occlusal surface, with the
inverted cone diamond, positioned parallel to the long
axis of the crown. When it is anticipated that the entire
mesiodistal length of a central groove will be prepared,
it is easier to enter the distal portion first, and then
transverse mesially This technique permits better vision
to the operator during the preparation. Prepare the pulpal floor to an initial depth of 1.5 mm, as measured from
the central groove (Fig. 13-8). Once the central groove
area is removed, the facial or lingual measurement of
this depth will be greater, usually about 1.75 mm, but
this depends on the steepness of the cuspal inclines
(Fig. 13-9). Normally this initial depth is approximately
0.2 mm inside (internal to) the DEJ. The diamond is

CHAPTER

13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

moved mesially (Fig. 13-10) to include other remaining
faults, following the central groove, as well as any fall
and rise of the DEJ (Fig. 13-11). Facial and lingual extension and width are dictated by the caries, old restorative
material, or fault. Preserve the strength of the cuspal and
marginal ridge areas as much as possible. Even though
the final bonded composite restoration will help restore
some of the strength of weakened, unprepared facial, lingual, mesial, or distal tooth structure, the outline form
should be as conservative as possible in these areas. Extensions toward cusp tips should be as minimal as possible. Extensions into marginal ridges should result in
approximately a 1.6-mm thickness of remaining tooth
structure (measured from the internal extension to the
proximal height of contour) for premolars and approxi-

f I G. 13-10 Diamond is moved mesially to include all faults.

mately 2 mm for molars (Fig. 13-12). These limited extensions help preserve the dentinal support of the marginal ridge enamel and cusp tips.
As the diamond is moved along the central groove,
the resulting pulpal floor is usually flat (as a result of the
shape of the tip of the diamond) and follows the rise
and fall of the DEJ. If extension is required toward the
cusp tips, the same approximate 1.5-mm depth is maintained, usually resulting in the pulpal floor rising occlusally (Fig. 13-13). The same uniform depth concept
is also appropriate when extending a facial or lingual
groove radiating from the occlusal surface. Once a groove
extension is through the cusp ridge, the diamond prepares the facial (or lingual) portion of the faulty groove
at an axial depth of 0.2 mm inside the DEJ, and gingivally to include all of the fault (Fig. 13-14). Either the
side or the tip of the diamond may be used for the facial
or lingual surfaced extension.
After extending the outline form to sound tooth structure, if any caries or old restorative material remains on
the pulpal floor, it should be removed with the diamond
or a round bur according to the descriptions presented
in Chapters 11 and 12. Even though the occlusal margin
does not have a beveled or flared form (because of the
shape of the diamond instrument), it is left as prepared.
No attempt is made to place additional beveling on the
occlusal margin because it may result in thin composite
in areas of heavy occlusal contact. Also, the inverted cone
diamond results in occlusal walls that converge occlus-

FIG 13-11 Mesiodistal initial pulpal depth preparation follows DEJ. A, Mesiodistal cross-section
of premolar. B, Move cutting instrument mesially. C, Follow contour of DEJ.

CHAPTER

13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

ally, thereby enhancing retention form. Because of the
occlusal surface enamel rod direction, the ends of the
enamel rods are already exposed by the preparation,
which further reduces the need for occlusal bevels. The
marginal form of a groove extension on the facial or lingual surface may be beveled with the diamond, resulting in a 0.25- to 0.5-mm width bevel at a 45-degree angle to the prepared wall (Fig. 13-15).
The larger Class I composite tooth preparation is primarily a conventional design. However, if a facial or lingual groove is included, it usually is beveled, and the
resulting preparation design would be a combination of
conventional and beveled conventional. Also it should
be reemphasized that only the cavitated carious lesion is
prepared in the manner described above. After the fault
is removed, adjacent less-involved or at-risk areas should

be included more conservatively with sealants or minimally invasive preparations. A diamond may be used to
roughen and/or include such adjacent areas. These will
then either be sealed or restored with a small amount of
composite when the conventionally prepared area is
restored.
Although large, extensive posterior composite restorations may have some potential disadvantages when
used routinely, "real world" dentistry sometimes necessitates esthetic treatment alternatives that may provide
a needed service to the patient. Often patients simply
cannot afford a more permanent esthetic restoration, or
they may possess dental or medical conditions that preclude their placement. In such instances, large posterior
composite restorations sometimes can be used as a
reasonable alternative when more permanent options
are not possible or realistic. Most extensive Class I and
Class 11 composite restorations utilize a conventional
tooth preparation design.
Modified Class I Tooth Preparation. Minimally involved Class I lesions or faults may be restored with
composite using modified tooth preparations. These
preparations are less specific in form, having a scoopedout appearance. Typically they are prepared with a
small round or inverted cone diamond. The initial pulpal depth is still 1.5 mm or approximately 0.2 mm inside
the DEJ, but may not be uniform (i.e., the pulpal floor is
not necessarily flat throughout its length). If a round diamond is used, the resulting cavosurface margin angle
may be more flared (obtuse) than if an inverted cone diamond were used (Fig. 13-16).

FIG

FIG. 13-13

13-12 Mesiodistal extension. Preserve dentin support of
marginal ridge enamel. A, Molar. B, Premolar.

Faciolingual extension. Maintain initial 1.5-mm
pulpal depth up cuspal inclines.

C H A P T E R 13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

FIG 13-14 Groove extension. A, Cross-section through facial and lingual groove area. B, Extension through cusp ridge at 1.5 mm initial pulpal depth; facial wall depth is 0.2 mm inside the
DEJ. C, Facial view.

FIG 13-15 Beveling a facial groove extension.
Coarse diamond creates a 0.5-mm bevel width
at a 45-degree angle. A, Facial view. B, Occlusal
view.

Mandibular premolars often have two separate faulty
occlusal pits located in areas of minimal function as illustrated in Fig. 13-17, A. Assuming a diagnosis of active caries, conservative restorations are indicated. The
outline form for the tooth preparation of each pit (see
Fig. 13-17, B) is similar to the Class VI modified preparation previously described with the use of a small diamond. Any shallow fissure that extends laterally from
the pit is incorporated in the preparation by an extended
cavosurface bevel or flare. This extended bevel or flare
is similar to an enameloplasty procedure as described in
Chapters 6 and 17. However, the entire bevel or flare becomes part of the final tooth preparation (a difference

from enameloplasty for amalgam preparations), which
is subsequently etched and restored with a posterior
composite. Small radiating fissures also may be optionally filled with sealant.
RESTORATIVE TECHNIQUE
Etching, Priming, and Placing Adhesive. Etching,

priming, and placement of adhesive techniques are the
same as described previously. Remember that overdrying etched dentin may compromise dentin bonding.
Water may be used for rewetting needs, but other aqueous solutions containing glutaraldehyde and/or hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) (see Chapters 4 and 5)

CHAPTER 13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

FIG. 13-16 Modified Class I tooth preparation using round
diamond. A, Faciolingual cross-section. B, Occlusal view.

B

FIG. 13-17 Class I pit preparations for composite restorations. A, Two small, faulty pits
are often present on a mandibular first premolar. B, Preparations are accomplished
with coarse diamond as conservatively as
possible. Note extension to include fissure.

may be even more beneficial when using one-bottle adhesive systems. No matrix usually is necessary for Class I
composite restorations, even when facial and lingual
surface grooves are included. However, if the operator
deems a matrix necessary for a groove extension composite restoration, a Barton matrix as described in Chapter 17 may be used.
I nserting and Curing the Composite. A two-step
procedure (enamel/dentin bonding adhesive, if not already applied, followed by the composite material) usually is necessary with a light-cured composite material.

The composite should not be dispensed until ready to
use because it may begin to polymerize from the ambient light in the operatory. Because of variations in materials, each manufacturer's specific instructions should
be followed.
The enamel/dentin bonding agents (including primers and adhesives) are placed over the entire preparation (etched enamel and dentin) with a microbrush,
foam sponge, or applicator tip, in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. The adhesive is polymerized with a visible light source, as recommended by the

CHAPTER

13

FIG

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

13-18 Class I composite incremental insertion (A) and curing (B).

FIG 13-19 Contouring and polishing Class I composite. A, Round or oval carbide 12-bladed fini shing bur used to remove excess and develop anatomic form. B, Carbide carver. C, Rubber
point polishes surface. D, Completed restoration.

manufacturer. Composite insertion hand instruments or
a syringe may be used to insert the composite material.
If a syringe is used, the tip on the compule must be kept
covered when not in use to prevent premature hardening of the material. Small increments of composite material are added and successively cured (Fig. 13-18). It is
important to place (and cure) the composite incrementally to maximize the polymerization depth of cure and
possibly to reduce the effects of polymerization shrinkage. For this reason, the first small increment should be
placed in the most remote area of the preparation. This
increment should only be approximately 1 to 2 mm in
thickness and should be cured with a light exposure of
20 to 40 seconds. Subsequent additions are made and
cured (1 to 2 mm in thickness at a time) until the preparation is filled to slight excess. The restoration can be
contoured and finished immediately after the last increment is cured.
Contouring and Polishing the Composite. Contouring can be initiated immediately after a light-cured
composite material has been polymerized, or 3 minutes

after the initial hardening of a self-cured material. The
occlusal surface is shaped with a round or oblong, 12bladed carbide finishing bur or similarly shaped finishing diamond. Special carbide-tipped carvers (Carbide
Carvers, Brasseler USA, Savannah, Georgia) are useful
for removing composite excess along occlusal margins.
Finishing is accomplished with appropriate polishing
cups and/or points after the occlusion is adjusted as
necessary (Fig. 13-19).
CLINICAL TECHNIQUE
FOR DIRECT CLASS II
COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS
I NITIAL CLINICAL PROCEDURES

The same general procedures as described previously
are necessary before beginning a Class II composite restoration. However, several aspects of those activities need
emphasis. First, an assessment of the expected tooth
preparation extensions (outline form) should be made
and a decision rendered on whether or not an enamel

CHAPTER

13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

periphery will exist on the tooth preparation. The expected presence of an enamel periphery strengthens the
choice of composite as the restorative material. If the
preparation is expected to extend onto the root surface,
composite is not necessarily contraindicated as the restorative material, but it must be recognized that potential problems with both isolation of the operating area
and gap formation exist. Good technique and proper use
of the material may reduce these potential problems.
Second, an assessment of the preoperative occlusal relationship of the tooth to be restored must be made. The
presence of heavy occlusal contacts should not necessarily contraindicate composite as the choice for restorative material, but it may indicate that wear may be more
of a consideration, necessitating timely recall appointment assessments.
Last, preoperative wedging in the gingival embrasure
of the proximal surfaces to be restored should occur. Placing wedges (after rubber dam application, if utilized) before tooth preparation, begins the separation of the teeth,
which may be beneficial in the reestablishment of the
proximal contact with the composite restoration.

TOOTH PREPARATION
The tooth preparation for a Class 11 composite restoration may be either a conventional or modified preparation design. The modified design is for smaller restorations, generally using smaller diamond instruments and
resulting in a preparation form that is more rounded,
less boxlike, and less uniform in extension or depth. It is
described later. The other predominant preparation design is similar to the conventional preparation for an
amalgam restoration as described in Chapter 17. It is
used for moderate to very large Class 11 composite restorations, generally using an inverted cone diamond.
The design results in a preparation form that is more
boxlike, has more uniform pulpal and axial depths, and
has some preparation walls prepared perpendicular to
occlusal forces (to enhance resistance form). However,
unlike conventional amalgam tooth preparations, the
conventional tooth preparation for composite does not
usually incorporate secondary retention features; does
not require 90-degree composite margins, is usually
more conservative in extensions; and is left with roughened, rather than smooth, preparation walls.
Both preparation designs have the same objectives:
(1) to remove the fault, defect, caries, or old material;
(2) to remove friable tooth structure; and (3) to have
cavosurface angles of 90 degrees or greater. The tooth
preparation has two components, the occlusal step portion (similar to that already described for Class I composite tooth preparations) and a proximal box portion.
Only faulty, carious, or defective tooth structure is included in the outline form. Remember that on the occlusal surface, less-involved or at-risk pits and grooves
adjacent to the tooth preparation may be included with

FIG

13-20 Preoperative visualization of facial and lingual
proximal box extensions. Arrows indicate desired extensions.

a sealant or other more conservative preparation, rather
than extending to include such areas as part of the original tooth preparation.
Conventional Class II Tooth Preparation

Occlusal Step. The occlusal portion of the Class II
preparation is prepared similarly as described for the
Class I preparation. The primary differences are related
to technique of incorporating the faulty proximal surface(s). Preoperatively, the proposed facial and lingual
proximal extensions should be visualized, thus permitting a more conservative connection between the occlusal
and proximal portions of the preparation (Fig. 13-20).
Initial occlusal extension toward the involved proximal
surface should go through the marginal ridge area at
initial pulpal floor depth, exposing the DEJ. The DEJ
serves as a guide for preparing the proximal box portion
of the preparation.
Use a No. 330 or No. 245 shaped diamond to enter the
pit opposite the faulty proximal surface. The diamond is
positioned parallel with the long axis of the tooth crown.
Remember that if only one proximal surface is being restored, the opposite marginal ridge dentinal support
should be maintained. This may require using the proxi mal side of the diamond to include the faulty pit near
the marginal ridge of the unaffected proximal surface,
especially in smaller teeth (Fig. 13-21). Remember also
that the entire central groove area may not need to be included, and only the faulty areas are prepared.
Prepare the pulpal floor with a diamond to a depth of
1.5 mm, as measured from the central groove. Once the
central groove is removed, the facial or lingual measurement of this depth will be greater, usually about 1.75 mm,
dependent on the steepness of the cuspal inclines. The
diamond is then moved toward the affected proximal
surface, including all faults facially and/or lingually as
it transverses the central groove. However, every effort
should be made to keep the faciolingual width of the
preparation as narrow as possible. The initial depth is
maintained during the mesiodistal movement, but follows the rise and fall of the underlying DEJ. The pulpal
floor is relatively flat in a faciolingual plane, but may
rise and fall slightly in a mesiodistal plane (Fig. 13-22).
If caries is still present in enamel on the pulpal floor
at the initial depth of 1.5 mm, then the pulpal floor is

C H A P T E R 13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

FIG . 13-21 For small teeth, use side of diamond to include
faulty pit, maintaining dentin support of noninvolved marginal
ridge enamel.

A

extended 0.2 mm inside the DEJ. If caries remains in the
dentin, it is removed as part of final tooth preparation.
Because the facial and lingual proximal extensions of
the faulty proximal surface were visualized preoperatively, the occlusal extension toward that proximal surface begins to widen facially and lingually to connect to
those points. Care is taken to preserve cuspal areas as
much as possible during these extensions. At the same
time, the diamond extends through the marginal ridge
to within 0.5 mm of the adjacent tooth. This exposes the
proximal DEJ and also protects the adjacent tooth (Fig.
13-23). At this time, the occlusal portion of the preparation is complete, except for possible additional pulpal
floor caries excavation. The occlusal walls generally
converge occlusally because of the inverted shape of the
diamond. This results in the occlusal cavosurface marginal form being representative of the strongest enamel
margin (an obtuse angle). Also the occlusal walls and
pulpal floor are left in a roughened state because of the
diamond instrument. This increases the surface area for
bonding.
Proximal Box. Typically, caries develops on a proximal surface immediately gingival to the proximal contact. The extent of the carious lesion or amount of old
restorative material are two factors that dictate the facial, lingual, and gingival extension of the proximal box
of the preparation. Other factors are discussed in Chap-

A

Follows
DEJ

B
FIG 13-22 Pulpal floor. A, Flat in a faciolingual plane. B, Foll ows DEJ in a mesiodistal plane.

B
FIG 13-23 Occlusal extension into faulty proximal. A and B,
Extension exposes DEJ but does not hit adjacent tooth. Facial
and lingual extensions as preoperatively visualized.

C H A P T E R 13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

ter 6. Although it is not required to extend the proximal
box beyond contact with the adjacent tooth (i.e., provide
clearance with the adjacent tooth), it may simplify the
preparation, matrix, composite insertion, and contouring procedures. However, if all of the fault can be removed without extending the proximal preparation beyond the contact, the restoration of the proximal contact
with the composite (a major difficulty) will be simplified (Fig. 13-24).
Once the diamond has extended through the marginal ridge, be careful not to cut the adjacent tooth, the
proximal ditch cut is initiated. Hold the diamond over
the DEJ with the tip of the diamond positioned to create
a gingivally directed cut that will be 0.2 mm inside the
DEJ (Fig. 13-25). For a No. 245 diamond instrument with
a tip diameter of 0.8 mm, this would require one fourth
of the diamond's tip positioned over the dentin side of
the DEJ (the other three fourths of the tip over the enamel
side). The diamond is then extended facially, lingually,
and gingivally to include all of the fault, caries, or old
material. The faciolingual cutting motion follows the
DEJ and therefore is usually in a slightly convex arc outward (see Fig. 13-25). During this entire cutting, the diamond is held parallel to the long axis of the tooth
crown. The facial and lingual margins are extended as
necessary and should result in at least a 90-degree margin, more obtuse being acceptable as well. If the preparation is conservative, use a smaller, thinner diamond
instrument to complete the facial and lingual wall formation, avoiding contact with the adjacent tooth (Fig.
13-26). The gingival floor is prepared flat (due to the tip
of the diamond) with an approximately 90-degree cavosurface margin. Gingival extension should be as minimal as possible, trying to maintain an enamel margin.

The axial wall should be 0.2 mm inside (internal to) the
DEJ and have a slight outward Convexity. For large carious lesions, additional axial wall (or pulpal floor) caries
excavation may be necessary later, during final tooth
preparation (Fig. 13-27).
At this point, the initial tooth preparation is complete. If no infected dentin remains and no proximal
beveling is indicated, the final preparation also is considered complete at this time (Fig. 13-28). Because the
composite will be retained in the preparation by micromechanical retention, no secondary preparation retention features are necessary. If an inverted cone diamond
has been used, the facial and lingual occlusal walls will
be convergent occlusally, adding to retention form. No
bevels are placed on the cavosurface margins, especially the occlusal margins. A bevel placed on an occlusal margin would result in thin composite on the occlusal surface in areas of potentially heavy contact. This
could result in fracture or wear of the composite in these
areas. Beveled composite margins also may be more
difficult to finish.

Margin left
i n contact

FIG

13-24

Proximal wall may be left in contact with adjacent

tooth.

Proximal ditch cut. A, Diamond positioned so gingivally directed cut will create axi al wall 0.2 mm inside the DEJ. B, Faciolingual direction of axial wall preparation follows DEJ.
C, Axial wall 0.2 mm inside DEJ.
FIG. 13-25

C H A P T E R 13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

a, b, c, d = Proximal bevels
FIG
13-26 Using smaller diamond to prepare cavosurface
margin areas of facial and lingual proximal walls. A, Facial and
li ngual proximal margins undermined. B, Using smaller diamond instrument.

FIG
13-27 Proximal extension. Try to maintain enamel margin on gingival floor. Any remaining infected axial wall (or pulpal floor) dentin will be excavated as part of final tooth preparation (as indicated by the dotted lines).

FIG 13-28 Final conventional Class 11 composite tooth preparation. A, Occlusal view. B, Proximal view.

Usually, bevels are not placed on facial and lingual
walls of the proximal box. However, bevels can be
placed on the proximal facial and lingual margins if the
proximal box is already wide faciolingually and if it is
determined that additional retention form may be nec-

FIG

13-29 Placing proximal bevels on extensive Class II tooth
preparations. Diamond used to create bevel, width dependent
on retention need.

essary (Fig. 13-29). Such bevels will increase the surface
area and expose enamel rod ends, thereby improving retention. Proximal bevels should not be placed if excessive extension of the margins is required.
A bevel is not usually placed on the gingival cavosurface margin, although it may be necessary to remove
any unsupported enamel rods at the margin because of
the gingival orientation of the enamel rods. For most
Class II preparations, this margin is already approaching the DEJ, and therefore the enamel is thin. Care is
taken to maintain any enamel in this area to result in a
preparation with all-enamel margins. If the preparation
extends onto the root surface, more attention must be
focused on keeping the area isolated during the bonding technique, but no differences in tooth preparation
are required. The preparation portion on the root should
have: (1) a 90-degree cavosurface margin, (2) an axial
depth of approximately 0.75 to 1 mm, and (3) usually no
secondary retention form. If the gingival floor is extended onto the root surface, the axial depth of 0.75 to
1 mm must be obtained by either deepening the entire
axial wall or orienting the diamond inclination more in
a proximal direction (Fig. 13-30).
Usually, the only remaining final tooth preparation
procedure that may be necessary is additional excavation of infected dentin on either the pulpal floor or axial
wall. If necessary, a round bur or appropriate spoon excavator is used to remove any remaining infected dentin.
Thus the conventional Class II composite tooth preparation is similar to that for amalgam, except no secondary retention features are incorporated, the extensions
are less, and there is no requirement for a 90-degree
composite margin, unless the preparation is extended
onto the root surface.
Fig. 13-31, A, illustrates an esthetic problem seen on
the mesiofacial corner of a maxillary first premolar as a
result of extensive recurrent caries and/or existing
faulty restoration. The preoperative occlusion assessment indicates the facial cusp of the opposing man-

CHAPTER 13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

FIG 13-30 Axial wall extension onto root surface. A, Caries below CEJ. B, Axial wall too deep
when prepared with diamond in same axis. C, Diamond tilted toward adjacent tooth to create
approximate 0.75- to 1-mm axial wall depth on root surface.

FIG 13-31 Mesioocclusal Class II tooth preparation for posterior composite restoration in maxillary first premolar. A, Esthetic problem is caused by caries and existing amalgam restoration.
B, In this patient the mesial marginal ridge is not a centric holding area. C, Early wedging after
rubber dam placement. D, Inverted cone bur or diamond is used for initial tooth preparations on
both premolars. E, After extensive caries is excavated, a calcium hydroxide liner is inserted (use
of newer dentin bonding systems would favor having no liner except for excavations within 0.5
mm of pulp. F, Preparations are completed, if necessary, by roughening the prepared tooth
structure with diamond instrument.

C H A PT E R 13

Classes[, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

dibular premolar (which usually occludes on the mesial
marginal ridge of the maxillary premolar) does not contact that area on this tooth (see Fig. 13-31, B). The existing occlusal amalgam on the maxillary second premolar also is determined to have extensive recurrent
caries and will be replaced with a composite during the
same appointment.
After the operator cleans the teeth, administers local
anesthetic, selects the shade of composite, and isolates
the area (preferably with a rubber dam), a wedge is
placed in the gingival embrasure (see Fig. 13-31, C).
Early wedging helps in separating the teeth, to compensate later for the thickness of the matrix band, thereby
fulfilling one of several requirements for a good proximal contact for the composite restoration. The lack of
pressure against the matrix during placement of composite, compared to pressure of amalgam during its condensation, presents the need, not only for increased separation by early wedge insertion, but also for alertness
of the operator to verify matrix contact with the adjacent
tooth before composite placement. The wedge also depresses and protects the rubber dam and gingival tissue
when the proximal area is prepared. An additional, further tightening (insertion) of the wedge during tooth
preparation may be helpful. The presence of the wedge
during tooth preparation may serve as a guide to help
prevent overextension of the gingival floor.
Recall that a conservative conventional tooth preparation is recommended for most Class II composite restorations because of the need for adequate resistance
form. A No. 245 bur or diamond is used to remove the
existing amalgam restorations and to prepare the mesial
surface of the first premolar in a conservative manner
(see Fig. 13-31, D). A smaller diamond may be more appropriate if the lesion is smaller.
A notable difference in the initial Class II preparation
design for a composite restoration compared to that for
an amalgam, is the axial wall depth. When preparing
the proximal box for a composite restoration, the axial
wall initial depth usually is limited to a depth of 0.2 mm
into dentin. This means that the tip of the No. 245 bur

or diamond would be cutting approximately one fourth
in dentin and three fourths in enamel to be most conservative. (The diameter of the No. 245 bur's tip end is
0.8 mm.) This decreased pulpal depth of the axial wall
occurs because retention locks will not be used; therefore the decreased depth provides greater conservation
of tooth structure. The occlusal walls may converge occlusally (due to the inverted shape of the No. 245 bur or
diamond) and the proximal walls may be parallel or convergent occlusally. Preparing convergent proximal walls
will provide additional retention form when needed.
With a round bur or spoon excavator, remove any remaining infected dentin and also any stains that show
through the mesiofacial enamel. In this example, a liner
of calcium hydroxide was applied over the deeply excavated area (see Fig. 13-31, E). Because of the removal of
the amalgam and extensive caries, many areas of the
enamel are unsupported by dentin, but not friable. This
undermined, but not friable enamel is not removed. If
the No. 245 bur has been used, roughen the accessible
prepared walls with a diamond. If a diamond has been
used for the preparation, the prepared walls are already
sufficiently roughened. At this time, the tooth preparation is complete (see Fig. 13-31, F).
For molars the same principles are followed for Class
11 conventional tooth preparations. Moderate caries exists on the mesial of a maxillary first molar (Fig. 13-32,
A). Isolation is achieved with a rubber dam. Early wedging with a short segment of a wooden toothpick initiates
tooth separation, which is critical to subsequently establishing a tight proximal contact (see Fig. 13-32, B). Preparation walls are extended to sound tooth structure and
infected dentin is excavated (see Fig. 13-32, C) as described previously.
If a composite restoration is satisfactorily bonded to
the preparation walls, such as in preparations in which
all margins are enamel, there should be little or no potential for microleakage, and no need for a liner. However, a
calcium hydroxide base (0.5 to 1 mm thick) is indicated to
treat a near exposure of the pulp (within 0.5 mm of the
pulp), a possible microexposure, or an actual exposure

FIG. 13-32 Mesioocclusal Class II tooth preparation for posterior composite restoration in a
maxillary molar. A, Carious lesion exists on mesial of maxillary molar in esthetically critical area.
B, Rubber dam isolation and early wedging. C, Preparation walls are extended to nonfriable
tooth structure and infected dentin excavated.

CHAPTER

13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

(see Chapter 3). Usually neither a liner nor a base is indicated in Class II tooth preparations for composite (Fig.
13-33). Actually, it is desirable not to cover any portion of
the dentinal walls with a liner, unless necessary, because
the liner would decrease dentin bonding potential.
Modified Class II Tooth Preparation. For small, initial restorations, an even more conservative preparation
design may be used. A small round or inverted cone diamond may be used for this preparation to scoop out
the carious or faulty material. This scooped appearance
occurs on both the occlusal and proximal portions. The
pulpal and axial depths are dictated only by the depth
of the lesion and are not necessarily uniform. The proximal extensions likewise are dictated only by the extent
of the lesion, but may require the use of another diamond with straight sides to prepare walls that are 90
degrees or greater (Fig. 13-34). The objectives are to
conservatively remove the fault, create 90-degree cavosurface margins or greater, and remove friable tooth
structure.
Another modified design is the box-only tooth preparation (Fig. 13-35). This design is indicated when only
the proximal surface is faulty, with no lesions on the occlusal surface. A proximal box is prepared with either an

inverted cone or round diamond, held parallel to the
long axis of the tooth crown. The diamond is extended
through the marginal ridge in a gingival direction. The
axial depth is prepared 0.2 mm inside the DEJ. The form
of the box is dependent on which diamond is used, the
more boxlike with the inverted cone, and the more
scooped with the round diamond. The facial, lingual, and
gingival extensions are dictated by the fault or caries.
No beveling or secondary retention is indicated.
A third modified design for restoring proximal lesions on posterior teeth is the facial or lingual slot preparation (Fig. 13-36). Here a lesion is detected on the proxi mal surface but the operator believes that access to the
lesion can be obtained from either a facial or lingual direction, rather than through the marginal ridge in a gingival direction. Usually a small round diamond is used
to gain access to the lesion. The diamond is oriented at
the correct occlusogingival position and the entry is
made with the diamond as close to the adjacent tooth as
possible, thus preserving as much of the facial or lingual
surface as possible. The preparation is extended occlusally, facially, and gingivally enough to remove the lesion.
The axial depth is 0.2 mm inside the DEJ. The occlusal,
facial, and gingival cavosurface margins are 90 degrees

FIG 13-33 Shallow mesioocclusal Class II tooth preparation for composite restoration, requiri ng no liner. A, Mesial caries exists preoperatively. B, Conservative tooth preparation. C, Completed restoration.

FIG 13-34 Modified Class II composite tooth preparation. A, Round or oval, small inverted cone diamond used. B and C, Facial, lingual, and gingival margins may need
undermined cavosurface enamel (indicated by dotted lines) removed with straightsided thin and flat-tipped diamond.

CHAPTER

13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

or greater. This preparation is similar to a Class III preparation for an anterior tooth.
RESTORATIVE TECHNIQUE
Etching, Priming, and Placing Adhesive. The etching, priming, and adhesive placement techniques are as
described previously.
Matrix Application. Undoubtedly one of the most important steps in restoring posterior teeth with directly
placed composite is the selection and proper placement of
the matrix. Unlike amalgam, which can be condensed to
improve the proximal contact development, posterior
composites are almost totally dependent on the contour
and position of the matrix for establishing appropriate
proximal contacts. Care must be exercised in placing a
matrix for a Class II restoration because it is difficult to obtain good proximal contacts on posterior teeth when
composite material is used. Early wedging and retightening of the wedge during tooth preparation aid in achieving sufficient separation of the teeth to compensate for
the thickness of the matrix band. Before placing the composite material, the matrix band (strip) must be in absolute contact with (touching) the adjacent contact area.

FIG . 13-35 Box-only Class II composite preparation.

Recall that the matrix may be placed before or after
the etching and priming treatment of the prepared tooth
structure. There are potential advantages and disadvantages for either sequence (see Chapter 12). Generally the
matrix is applied before the etching, priming, and adhesive placement.
An ultrathin metal matrix band is preferred for the
restoration of a Class II composite, because it is thinner
than a typical metal or polyester matrix and can be contoured better than a clear polyester matrix. Furthermore,
a metal matrix offers greater resistance to condensation,
which is especially important when a more viscous or
packable composite is used. No significant problems are
experienced in placing and curing composite material
when using a metal matrix as long as small incremental
additions (less than 2 mm each) are used (each increment
cured before placing the next).
A Tofflemire matrix can be used for restoring a twosurface tooth preparation but must be sufficiently wedged
to compensate adequately for the two thicknesses of matrix band (Fig. 13-37, A). An ultrathin (0.001 inch) universal metal matrix band (HO Bands, Young Dental
Company, Earth City, Missouri) should be used in the
Tofflemire retainer to aid in obtaining a good proximal
contact. Before placement, the metal matrix band for
posterior composites should be burnished on a paper
pad to impart proper proximal contour to the band (the
same as a matrix for amalgam).
If the Tofflemire matrix band is open excessively
along the lingual margins of the preparation (usually because of the contour of the tooth), a "tinner's joint" can
be used to close the matrix band. This joint is made by
grasping the lingual portion of the matrix band with
No. 110 pliers and cinching the band tightly together
above the height of contour of the tooth (Fig. 13-38, D).
The gathered matrix material can be easily folded to one

FIG 13-36 Facial/lingual slot preparation. A, Cervical caries on proximal surface. B, Round diamond enters tooth from accessible embrasure, oriented to the occlusogingival middle of the lesion. C, Slot preparation (lingual view).

C H A P T E R 13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

side with a large amalgam condenser. By closing the open
portion of the matrix band, significant time and effort are
saved when contouring and finishing the restoration.
A customized, compound-supported metal matrix is
an excellent matrix for a two-surface posterior composite

restoration because it is easier to obtain a good proximal
contact when the wedge must compensate for only one
thickness of metal matrix material. The materials needed
for this matrix are shown in Fig. 13-39. A short length of
thin, dead-soft or stainless steel metal matrix material

FIG . 13-37 I nsertion of light-cured composite material, maxillary molar. A, A thin Tofflemiretype matrix is positioned and wedged. Bonding system has been placed. B to E, Composite is
placed and cured in small increments until preparation is slightly overfilled.

FIG . 13-38 Placement of proximal matrix for posterior composite restoration shown in Fig. 13-31.
A, Strip matrix positioned and wedged for two-surface preparation. B and C, Compound cones
are softened and applied to matrix while a burnisher is used to stabilize the strip against adjacent tooth. D, Tofflemire matrix positioned and contoured for three-surface preparation.

C H A PT E R 13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

(Dead Soft Metal Matrix, DenMat Corporation, Santa
Maria, California) is cut, contoured, and burnished. Commercial, precontoured types (Palodent Matrix, Palodent
Company, Portola Valley, California; Composi-Tight Matrix, Garrison Dental Solutions, Spring Lake, Michigan)
also are available. The small compound cones are made
by softening green stick compound over a Bunsen burner
as described in Chapter 17. The initial wedge placed during tooth preparation is removed, the matrix positioned,
and a new wedge placed (see Fig. 13-38, A). It is helpful
to hold the strip against the adjacent tooth with a burnisher while the matrix is stabilized with the softened,
compound cones (see Fig. 13-38, B and C). If additional
contouring is needed, it can be accomplished with the
back side of a warmed Black's spoon excavator.
When both proximal surfaces are involved, a Tofflemire retainer with an ultrathin, burnishable matrix band
is used. The band is contoured, positioned, wedged,
and shaped as needed for proper proximal contacts and
embrasures (see Fig. 13-38, D). The use of compound to
help support a matrix of this type is generally not necessary because heavy condensing forces are not used
when the posterior composite material is inserted.
Clear polyester matrices are available and may be
used for the restoration of very small Class II prepara-

I I G. 13-39 Materials for application of compound-supported
matrix on two-surface preparations: thin, dead-soft strip metal
(v) or preformed matrices (w), green stick compound and
cones (x), wooden wedges (y), and No. 110 pliers (z).

A

tions. Care must be taken to properly contour the polyester matrix strip, as described in Chapter 12, to impart
sufficient convexity into the polyester band. Precontoured polyester matrices also are available for use in
light-weight Tofflemeire retainers (Teledyne Water Pik,
Fort Collins, Colorado) or as part of a unique circumferential matrix system called the Translite Auto Matrix
System (Dentsply/Caulk, Milford, Delaware). Clear
polyester matrices are typically thicker than metal matrices and must be firmly wedged to compensate for this
additional thickness. Clear polyester matrices are not
recommended for larger posterior composite restorations because they cannot be contoured as well as metal
matrices and they do not provide adequate resistance
to condensation if a viscous composite is used.
However, other matrix systems have been developed
for Class Il composite restorations. The primary benefit
promoted by their manufacturers is a simpler method for
establishing an appropriate composite proximal contact.
Several of the available systems are shown in Fig. 13-40.
I nserting and Curing the Composite. A two-step
procedure (applying the enamel/dentin bonding adhesive, if not already applied, then the posterior composite material) is followed with either self-cured (seldom
used) or light-cured composite materials. A light-cured
system is used for restoring the Class II preparation illustrated on the maxillary first molar shown in Fig. 13-37
and the maxillary left premolars in Fig. 13-41. These materials should not be dispensed until ready to use, because they will begin to polymerize from the ambient
light in the operatory. Because of variations in materials, each manufacturer's specific instructions should be
followed.
The enamel/dentin bonding adhesive is placed over
the entire preparation (etched and primed enamel and
dentin) with a microbrush, foam sponge, or applicator
tip in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
The adhesive is polymerized with a visible light source,
usually for 20 seconds.
Composite insertion hand instruments or a syringe
may be used to insert the composite material (Fig. 13-42).
The first type of syringe (y) (Centrix Inc., Milford, Connecticut) shown can be used with a clear plastic tip for

B

FIG . 13-40 New composite matrix systems. A, Contact Matrix (Danville Materials). B, ComposiTight Matrix System (Garrison Dental Solutions, Spring Lake, Michigan).

CHAPTER

13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

self-cured composites or with a black or orange tip for
light-cured composites. The second syringe (z) (Dentsply/
Caulk, Milford, Delaware) is designed by the manufacturer for use with preloaded compule tips. The tips on
both types must be kept covered when not in use to prevent premature hardening of light-cured materials.
Following matrix and adhesive placement, small increments of composite material are added and successively cured (see Fig. 13-37). It is important to place (and
cure) the composite incrementally to maximize the curing potential and, possibly, reduce the effects of polymerization shrinkage. For this reason, the first small increment should be placed along the gingival floor and
should extend slightly up the facial and lingual walls
(see Fig. 13-37, B). This increment should only be approximately 1 to 2 mm in thickness because it is the farthest increment from the curing light and is most critical
in establishing a proper gingival seal. This first increment should be cured with a light exposure of 20 to
40 seconds (see Fig. 13-37, C). Subsequent additions are
made and cured (usually not exceeding 2 mm in thick-

ness at a time) until the preparation is filled to slight excess (see Fig. 13-37, D and E). The restoration can be
contoured and finished immediately after the last increment is cured. Another clinical example is illustrated in
Fig. 13-41. Light-cured composites work very well for the
restoration of posterior teeth because of extended working time and the ease of incremental placement (and
cure). However, if a light-cured composite is not available, a self-cured composite can be used.
Contouring and Polishing the Composite. Contouring can be initiated immediately after a light-cured composite material has been polymerized, or 3 minutes after
the initial hardening of a self-cured material. The occlusal
surface is shaped with a round or oval, 12-bladed carbide finishing bur (Figs. 13-43, A, and 13-44, A) or finishing diamond. Special carbide-tipped carvers are useful
for removing composite excess along occlusal margins
(see Fig. 13-43, B). Excess composite is removed at the
proximal margins and embrasures with a flame-shaped,
12-bladed carbide finishing bur (see Figs. 13-43, C, and
13-44, B) or finishing diamond and abrasive discs (see

FIG . 13-41

I nsertion of light-cured composite material, maxillary premolar. A to C, Compoundsupported matrix has been positioned, wedged, and reinforced. Composite is inserted and
cured in small increments until preparation is slightly overfilled.

FIG . 13-42 I nsertion instruments for composite. A, Anodized aluminum instruments. B, Two
types of injection syringes: Centrix (y) and Caulk (z).

CHAPTER

13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

Fig. 13-44, C. Any overhangs at the gingival area are removed with a sharp amalgam knife, gold knife, or a No.
12 surgical blade mounted in a Bard-Parker handle.
These instruments are used with light shaving strokes to
remove the excess (see Fig. 13-44, D). Narrow finishing

strips may be used to smooth the gingival proximal surface (see Fig. 13-43, D). Care must be exercised to maintain the position of the finishing strips gingival to the
proximal contact area to avoid inadvertent opening of
the contact.

FIG . 13-43

Contouring and finishing posterior composite restoration. A, Round (or oval), 12bladed carbide finishing bur is used to contour occlusal surface. B, Carbide-tipped carver is
useful for removing excess composite along occlusal margins. C, Flame-shaped carbide finishi ng bur is used to contour proximal areas. D, Narrow finishing strip smoothes proximal areas.
E, Abrasive rubber point is used to smooth occlusal surfaces. F, Completed posterior composite restoration with articulation marks.

FIG . 13-44

Contouring and finishing posterior composite restoration. (A, B, and E are mirror
views.) A, Occlusal surface shaped with round (or oval), 12-bladed carbide finishing bur. B and
C, Proximal areas are shaped with flame-shaped finishing bur and abrasive discs. D, Removing
excess material at gingival area with a No. 12 blade (Bard-Parker handle). E and F, Occlusal and
facial views after rubber dam removal, occlusal adjustments, and final polishing.

CHAPTER

13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

The rubber dam (or other means of isolation) is removed and the occlusion is evaluated for proper contact. Further adjustments are made if needed, and the restorations are finished with fine, rubber abrasive points,
cups, and/or discs (see Fig. 13-43, E). The restored teeth
are illustrated in Figs. 13-43, F, and 13-44, E and F.

CLINICAL TECHNIQUE
FOR EXTENSIVE CLASS II
COMPOSITE RESTORATIONS
AND FOUNDATIONS
When very large restorations are required, it usually indicates that: (1) most of the occlusal contacts will be restored by the restorative material, (2) the extensions will
be onto the root surface, and (3) the area will probably
be difficult to isolate. All three of these conditions increase the concerns of using composite as the restorative
material. However, composite may be the material selected for either very large Class II restorations, or foundations that will serve under indirect restorations. Very
large Class 11 preparations may be indicated when economic factors prevent the patient from selecting a more
expensive indirect restoration. The ability to strengthen
the weakened tooth structure with a bonded restoration
sometimes makes this procedure a logical choice. This
type of restoration also may be indicated as an interim
restoration, while waiting to determine the pulpal response, or whether or not the restoration will function
appropriately. Composite also may be considered for
use as a foundation for indirect restorations (primarily
crowns) when the operator determines that insufficient
natural tooth structure remains to provide adequate retention and resistance form for the crown. Thus the
tooth is first restored with a large restoration and then
prepared for a crown. Parts of the axial and/or occlusal
surfaces of the crown preparation may then be composite, rather than tooth structure.
It should be noted that amalgam may be the restorative material of choice for both of these procedures, because of its known wear resistance, strength, and track
record in serving as both of these types of restorations.
Amalgam restorations used for these purposes can also
be bonded, providing the following: (1) a good dentinal
seal, (2) additional retention form, and (3) reinforcement
of the remaining weakened tooth structure, although the

extent of the perceived advantages is largely unknown.
Large Class II amalgam restorations and amalgam foundations are presented in Chapter 19. Whether a composite or bonded amalgam restoration is selected, the
area must be kept isolated from moisture contamination
during the bonding procedure, or a clinical failure is
likely, especially considering the increased size of the
restoration.
In addition to the tooth preparation form, the primary
retention form for a very large Class 11 composite restoration is the micromechanical bonding of the composite
to the enamel and dentin. However, secondary retention
features usually are incorporated into the large preparation because of: (1) the increased amount of missing tooth
structure; (2) the decreased amount of tooth structure
available for bonding; and, therefore, (3) the increased
concern for retaining the composite in the tooth. These
may include grooves, coves, locks, slots, or pins. Increased
retention form also may be accomplished by including
otherwise sound areas of the remaining tooth structure
(e.g., facial or lingual grooves), or making wider bevels or
flares on accessible enamel margins, both of which increase the surface area for bonding.
The primary differences for these very large preparations include the following: (1) some or all of the cusps
may be capped, (2) extensions in most directions will be
greater, (3) more secondary retention features will be
used, and (4) more resistance form features will be used.
A cusp must be capped if the operator believes it will
likely fracture if left in a weakened state. Capping a
cusp usually is indicated when the occlusal outline form
extends more than two thirds the distance from a primary groove to a cusp tip. An operator may sometimes
choose to ignore this general rule when using a bonded
restoration because the bonding strengthens the remaining weakened unprepared tooth structure.
If the tooth has had endodontic treatment, the pulp
chamber can be opened, and extensions made several
millimeters into each treated canal (Fig. 13-45). These areas are etched and primed, adhesive is placed, and composite is inserted and cured incrementally. Because of
the increased surface area for bonding and the mechanical retention from extensions into the canals, usually
fewer secondary retention features are incorporated into
the tooth preparation.

FIG 13-45 Preparation extension into pulp chamber
and canal for endodontically treated tooth. A, Occlusal view. B, Proximal view.

CHAPTER

13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

A

B

FIG . 13-46 Extensive caries facially and lingually. A, After initial entry cut at correct initial depth
(1.5 mm), caries remains facially and lingually. B, Orientation of diamond must be tilted as instrument is extended facially or lingually to maintain a 1.5-mm depth.

CLINICAL TECHNIQUE
The inverted cone diamond is used to prepare the occlusal surface. As already indicated, usually the occlusal
outline form is extensive. When moving the diamond
from the central groove area toward a cuspal prominence, the 1.5-mm pulpal depth should be maintained,
if possible. This creates a pulpal floor, which rises occlusally as it is extended either facially or lingually (Fig.
13-46). If a cusp must be capped, the side of the diamond can first be used to make several depth cuts in
the remaining cuspal form to serve as a guide for cusp
reduction. Cusps should be capped as early in the tooth
preparation procedure as possible, providing more access and visibility for the preparation. The depth cut is
made with the diamond held parallel to the cuspal incline (from cusp tip to central groove) and approximately 1.5 mm in depth. For a large cusp, several depth
cuts can be made. Then the diamond is used to join the
depth cuts and extend to the remainder of the cuspal
form (Fig. 13-47). The reduced cusp will have a relatively flat surface that may rise and fall with the normal
mesial and distal inclines of the cusp. It also should provide enough clearance with the opposing tooth to result
in approximately 1.5 to 2 mm of composite material to
restore form and function. The cusp reduction should be
blended in with the rest of the occlusal step portion of
the preparation.
The proximal boxes (usually both would be involved
in a large restoration or foundation) are prepared as described previously. The primary difference is that they
may be much larger, that is, more extension in every di-

rection. The extent of the lesion may dictate that a proximal box extend around the line angle of the tooth to
include faulty facial or lingual tooth structure. Once the
outline form has been established (the margins extended
to sound tooth structure), the preparation is carefully
assessed for additional retention form needs.
Retention form can be enhanced by the placement of
grooves, locks, coves, or slots. Pins can be used, but not
as effectively esthetically as the other potential secondary retention forms. All such retention form features
must be placed entirely in dentin, thereby not undermining and weakening any adjacent enamel. At times,
bevels may be placed on available enamel margins to
enhance retention form, even occlusal areas. Additionally, for extensive Class II restorations or foundations, arbitrary inclusion of uninvolved facial or lingual grooves
may be considered for preparation, thereby increasing
the bonding surface area. Retention form for foundations must be placed far enough inside the DEJ (approximately 1 mm) to remain after the crown preparation is
done subsequently. Otherwise, the potential retentiveness may be lost for the foundation (Fig. 13-48).
Fig. 13-49 illustrates an example of a very extensive
Class II modified tooth preparation. A maxillary first
premolar is badly discolored from a large, faulty, corroded amalgam restoration and caries (see Fig. 13-49,
A). Esthetic and economic factors resulted in the decision to replace the amalgam with a composite restoration, rather than an indirect restoration. The preparation
is shown with all of the old amalgam and infected
dentin removed, leaving the facial and lingual enamel

C H A PT E R 13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

A

FIG 13-47 Cusp reduction. A, Initial outline form weakens mesiolingual cusp enough to require
capping. B, Depth cuts made. C, Depth cuts. D, Cusp reduction prepared. E, Vertical wall maintained between reduced and unreduced cusps.

wall severely weakened (see Fig. 13-49, B). After placement of a calcium hydroxide liner over the deeply excavated area (see Fig. 13-49, C, a diamond was used to reduce the severely undermined enamel of the lingual cusp
approximately 1.5 mm and place a reverse bevel with a
chamfered margin on the lingual surface (see Fig. 13-49,
D). The same instrument was used to reduce the facial
cusp 0.75 mm and place a slight counterbevel. This extensive tooth preparation has been observed to be successful, but not from controlled clinical research studies.
The completed restoration is shown in Fig. 13-50, C,
and, after 5 years of service, in Fig. 13-50, D and E.
Matrix placement is more demanding for these large
restorations because more tooth structure is missing and
more margins may be subgingival. Proper burnishing of
the matrix band to effect appropriate axial contours is
important. It also may be necessary to modify the matrix band to provide more subgingival extension in some
areas and prevent extrusion of the composite from the
matrix band-retainer junction.
Typical etching and priming techniques are followed.
Because much of the composite bond will be to dentin,
proper technique is very important. Placement of the adhesive (if a separate step) is accomplished as previously
described, and the composite is inserted incrementally.
The composite is first placed in 1- to 2-mm increments

Composite foundation
Crown preparation

FIG . 13-48 Retention form for foundations must be internal to
eventual crown preparation.

into the most gingival areas of the proximal boxes. Each
increment is cured as directed. It may be helpful to use
a hand instrument to hold the matrix against the adjacent tooth while curing the composite. This may assist
in restoring the proximal contact. Fig. 13-51 shows the
matrix placement and composite insertion for the tooth
prepared in Fig. 13-49.
Contouring the large composite is also more difficult because of the number of surfaces that may be involved and
the amount of composite present. Physiologic contours

C H A P T E R 13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

A

FIG 13-49 Mesioocclusodistal Class II extensive modified tooth preparation for composite
restoration. A, Esthetics and cost are factors in decision to replace faulty restoration with posterior composite. B, Amalgam and infected dentin removed. C, Calcium hydroxide liner inserted.
D, Diamond used to reduce severely undermined lingual cusp and place bevel.

FIG . 13-50 Preoperative and postoperative views of posterior composite restoration. (A and E
are mirror views.) A and B, Preoperative facial and occlusal views. C, After inserting and poli shing composite restoration. Occlusal (D) and facial (E) views after 5 years of service. F, Occlusion marked with articulating paper at 5-year recall appointment.

and contacts are necessary for restorations, but they are
less important for foundations that will only be present
for a very short period of time before the crown preparation is done. Because of the extensiveness of these
restorations, a careful assessment of the contours should
be made from all angles. Once contouring is completed,
the occlusion is adjusted as necessary and the restora-

tion is polished. Because these very large restorations
may stretch the limits of composite restorations, the patient should be on a frequent recall regimen. Fig. 13-50
illustrates the contouring, polishing, and 5-year recall of
the extensive tooth preparation in Fig. 13-49.
Many dentists prefer to use self-cured composites for
foundations and core build-ups. Without the need for

CHAPTER

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

13

A, Self-cured composite will be inserted into the three-surface preparation shown
with matrix in place. B, Injected composite was covered by matrix strip and held under pressure
during polymerization.

FIG . 13-51

light activation, the composite can be placed in bulk,
which can save considerable time. The composite core is
typically placed following application of an enamel/
dentin adhesive. Most current adhesives contain the
primer and bonding agent in one solution (see Chapter 5). Unfortunately, almost none of the "one-bottle" adhesives provide an acceptable bond of self-cure
composite to tooth structure. While the reason for this is
not completely understood, some investigators believe
that acidic monomers in the adhesives can interfere with
the activators (tertiary amines) in the self-cure composite. If the activator does not function properly, the composite at the adhesive interface will not polymerize thoroughly and will not bond to the adhesive or the
underlying tooth structure. Some manufacturers have
introduced optional chemical catalysts that can be mixed
with the adhesive to reduce or prevent this problem.
SUMMARY

This chapter has presented the rationale and technique
for composite use in the treatment of the occlusal and
proximal surfaces of posterior teeth. This chapter and
textbook emphasize the use of composite as the restorative material for many Class I and Class II restorations.
Although greater emphasis has been placed on the use
of composite in posterior teeth, this emphasis is not due
to concerns for the use of amalgam as a restorative material. As later chapters demonstrate, amalgam restorations are still strongly recommended in this textbook.
Regardless, many Class I and Class II lesions are best restored with composite. Typical problems, solutions, and
repair techniques for composite restorations are presented in Chapter 11.
REFERENCES
1. American Dental Association: Intervention: pit and fissure
sealants, JAm Dent Assoc 126:17S-18S, 1995.
2. American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs,
ADA Council on Dental Benefits and Programs: statement on
posterior resin-based composites, J Am Dent Assoc130: 16271628,1998.
3. Ausiello P et al: Fracture resistance of endodontically-treated
premolars adhesively restored, Am J Dent 10:237-241, 1997.

4. Barnes DM et al: A 5- and 8-year clinical evaluation of a posterior composite resin, Quintessence Int 22:143-151, 1991.
5. Bayne SC et al: Clinical longevity of ten posterior composite
materials based on wear (abstract no. 630), J Dent Res 70:344,
1991.
6. Bayne SC et al: Long term clinical failures in posterior composites (abstract no. 32), J Dent Res 68:185, 1989.
7. Collins CJ, Bryant RV, Hodge KL: A clinical evaluation of posterior composite resin restorations: 8-year findings, J Dent
26(4):311-317, 1998.
8. Combe EC, Burke FJT, Douglas WH: Thermal properties. In
Combe EC, Burke FJT, Douglas WH, editors: Dental biomaterials, Boston, 1999, Kluwer Academic.
9. Ehrnford L, DerandT: Cervical gap formation in Class II composite resin restorations, Swed Dent J 8:15-19, 1984.
10. Gwinnett AJ: Moist versus dry dentin: its effect on shear bond
strength, Am J Dent 5:127-129, 1992.
11. Gwinnett AJ, Kanca JA: Micromorphology of the bonded
dentin interface and its relationship to bond strength, Am J
Dent 5:73-77, 1992.
12. Handelman SL et al: Clinical radiographic evaluation of
sealed carious and sound tooth surfaces, J Am Dent Assoc 113:
751-754, Nov 1986.
13. Heymann HO, Bayne SC: Current concepts in dentin bonding: focusing on dentinal adhesion factors, J Am Dent Assoc
124(5):27-36, May 1993.
14. Heymann HO et al: Two-year clinical study of composite
resins in posterior teeth, Dent Mater 2:37-41, 1986.
15. Kumar J, Siegal MD: Workshop on guidelines for sealant use:
recommendations, J Pub Health Dent 55(No. 5; special issue):263-273, 1995.
16. Liberman R et al: The effect of posterior composite restorations on the resistance of cavity walls to vertically applied
loads, J Oral Rehabil 17:99-105, 1990.
17. Mair LH: Ten-year clinical assessment of three posterior resin
composites and two amalgams, Quint Internat 29:483-490,
1998.
18. Mazer RB, Leinfelder KF: Clinical evaluation of a posterior
composite resin containing a new type of filler particle, J Esthet
Dent 1:66-70, 1988.
19. Mazer RB, Leinfelder KF: Evaluating a microfill posterior composite resin: a five year study, JAm Dent Assoc 123(4):33-38,1992.
20. McCune RJ, Cvar JF, Ryge G: Clinical comparison of anterior
and posterior restorative materials (abstract no. 482), Int Assoc
Dent Res 161, March 1969.
21. McCune RJ et al: Clinical comparison of posterior restorative
materials (abstract no. 546), Int Assoc Dent Res 175, March
1967.

C H A PT E R 13

Classes I, II, and VI Direct Composite and Other Tooth-Colored Restorations

22. Mertz-Fairhurst EJ et al: Cariostatic and ultraconservative
sealed restorations: six year results, Quintessence Int 23(12):
827-838,1992.
23. Simonsen RJ: Preventive resin restoration, Quintessence Int
9(1):69-76, 1978.
24. Simonsen RJ: Preventive resin restorations: three year results,
J Am Dent Assoc 100(4):535-539,1980.
25. Simonsen RJ: Retention and effectiveness of a single application of white sealant after 10 years, J Am Dent Assoc 115:
31-36, July 1987.
26. Sturdevant JR et al: Five-year study of two light-cured posterior composite resins, Dent Mater 4:105-110, 1988.

27. Swift EJ Jr: The effect of sealants on dental caries: a review,
JAm Dent Assoc 116:700-704, May 1988.
28. Torstenson B, Brannstrom M: Composite resin contraction
gaps measured with a fluorescent resin technique, Dent Mater
4:238-242, 1988.
29. Wilder AD, May KN, Leinfelder KF: Three-year clinical study
of UV cured composite resins in posterior teeth, J Prosthet
Dent 50(1):26, 1983.
30. Wilson NHF et al: Five-year findings of a multiclinical trial for
a posterior composite, J Dent 19:153-159, 1991.

Classes I and II indirect restorations, 571
A. Indications, 571
B. Contraindications, 571
C. Advantages, 571
D. Disadvantages, 572
E. Laboratory-processed composite inlays and
onlays, 573
F. Ceramic inlays and onlays, 574
1. Feldspathic porcelain inlays and onlays, 574
2. Hot pressed glass ceramics, 575
3. CAD/CAM, 578
Clinical procedures, 579
A. Tooth preparation, 579
B. Impression, 581

III

C. Temporary restoration, 582
D. CAD/CAM techniques, 582
E. Try-in and cementation, 583
1. Preliminary steps, 583
2. Restoration try-in and proximal contact
adjustment, 583
3. Cementation, 584
F. Finishing and polishing procedures, 584
G. Clinical procedures for CAD/CAM inlays and
onlays, 587
H. Common problems and solutions, 587
I. Repair of tooth-colored inlays and onlays, 588
Summary, 589

C H A PT E R

14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

CLASSES I AND II
I NDIRECT RESTORATIONS
The previous three chapters describe directly placed
tooth-colored composite restorations. Teeth also can be
restored using indirect techniques, in which restorations
are fabricated outside of the mouth. Most indirect restorations are made on a replica of the prepared tooth in
a dental laboratory by a trained technician. Tooth-colored
indirect systems include laboratory-processed composites or ceramics such as porcelain fired on refractory dies
or hot pressed glasses. In addition, at least one chairside
computer-aided design/computer-assisted manufacturing (CAD/CAM) system is currently available and is
used to fabricate ceramic restorations (Fig. 14-1). This
chapter reviews the indications, contraindications, advantages, disadvantages, and the clinical technique for
Class I and Class II indirect tooth-colored restorations.
I NDICATIONS
The indications for Classes I or II indirect toothcolored restorations relate to a combination of esthetic
demands and size of the restoration and include the
following:
Esthetics-Indirect tooth-colored restorations are indicated for Class I or Class II restorations located in
areas of esthetic importance for the patient.
Large defects or previous restorations-Indirect toothcolored restorations should be considered for restoration of large Class I or Class 11 defects or replacement of
large existing compromised restorations, especially
those that are wide faciolingually and require cusp coverage. Large preparations are best restored with adhesive restorations that strengthen the remaining tooth
structure." The contours of large restorations are
more easily developed when using indirect techniques.
Indirect tooth-colored restorative materials are more
durable than direct composites, especially in regard to
maintaining occlusal surfaces and occlusal contacts .
The wear resistance provided by indirect materials is
especially important in large posterior restorations that
involve most or all of the occlusal contacts.-" However,

FIG . 14-1

without sufficient bulk, an extensive indirect ceramic or
composite restoration may fracture under occlusal
loading, particularly in the molar region.
• Economic factors-Some patients desire the best dental
treatment available, regardless of cost. For these patients, indirect tooth-colored restorations may be indicated not only for large restorations, but also for
moderate-sized restorations that might otherwise be
restored with a direct restorative material (usually
composite).
CONTRAINDICATIONS
Contraindications for indirect tooth-colored restorations include:
Heavy occlusal forces-Ceramic restorations may fracture when they lack sufficient bulk or are subject to
excessive occlusal stress, as in patients who have
bruxing or clenching habits. Heavy wear facets or a
lack of occlusal enamel are good indicators of bruxing
and clenching habits (Fig. 14-2).
Inability to maintain a dry field-Despite some research
suggesting that modern dental adhesives can counteract certain types of contamination, adhesive techniques require near-perfect moisture control to ensure
successful long-term clinical results.
Deep subgingival preparations-Although this is not an
absolute contraindication, preparations with deep subgingival margins should be avoided. These margins
are difficult to record with an impression and are difficult to finish. Additionally, bonding to enamel margins is greatly preferred, especially along gingival
margins of proximal boxes .2°
ADVANTAGES
The advantages of indirect tooth-colored restorations are
similar to those of direct composite restorations (excluding cost and time) (see Chapter 11). Indirect tooth-colored
restorations have the following additional advantages:
• Improved physical properties-A wide variety of highstrength tooth-colored restorative materials, including

A, Defective mesioocclusodistal (MOD) amalgam restorations on mandibular premolars were replaced with CAD/CAM ceramic inlays. B, Ceramic inlays after 12 years of clinical
service.

C H A P T E R 14

Classes I and III ndirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

A

B
FIG
14-2 A, Clenching and bruxing habits can cause extensive wear of occlusal surfaces. This
patient is not a good candidate for ceramic inlays. B, Example of a fractured inlay in a patient
with heavy occlusion.

laboratory-processed and computer-milled composites and ceramics, can be used with indirect techniques. Indirect restorations have better physical properties than direct composite restorations because they
are fabricated under relatively ideal laboratory conditions. Also, while CAD/CAM restorations are generally fabricated chairside, the materials themselves
are manufactured under very nearly ideal industrial
conditions . 56
Variety of materials and techniques-Indirect toothcolored restorations can be fabricated with either composites or ceramics using various laboratory processes
or CAD/CAM methods.
• Wear resistance-Ceramic restorations are more wearresistant than direct composite restorations, an especially critical factor when restoring large occlusal
areas of posterior teeth. Laboratory-processed composite restorations wear more than ceramics, but less
than direct composites in laboratory studies .

direct restorations because of the improved access
and visibility outside the mouth.
Biocompatibility and good tissue response-Ceramic materials are considered the most chemically inert of all
materials. They are biocompatible and generally are
associated with a good soft tissue response . 2,27 The
pulpal biocompatibility of the indirect techniques is
related more to the adhesive composite cements (see
Chapter 4) rather than the ceramic materials used.
Increased auxiliary support-Most indirect techniques
allow the fabrication of the restoration to be totally or
partially delegated to dental laboratory technicians.
Such delegation allows for more efficient use of the
dentist's time.

DISADVANTAGES
The following are disadvantages of indirect toothcolored restorations:

shrinkage-Polymerization

Increased cost and time-Most indirect techniques re-

shrinkage and its consequential stresses are still a major shortcoming of direct composite restorations. With
indirect techniques, the bulk of the preparation is
filled with the indirect tooth-colored restoration, and
stresses are reduced because very little composite cement is used during cementation. Although shrinkage of composite in thin bonded layers can produce
relatively high stress," studies indicate that indirect
composite restorations have fewer marginal voids,
less microleakage, and less postoperative sensitivity
than direct composites . 12,14,47,58
• Ability to strengthen remaining tooth structure-Tooth
structure weakened by caries, trauma, and/or preparation can be strengthened by adhesively bonding
indirect inlays and onlays. The reduced polymerization shrinkage stress obtained with the indirect
technique is also desirable when restoring such weakened teeth.
• More precise control of contours and contacts-Indirect
techniques usually provide better contours (especially proximal contours) and occlusal contacts than

quire two patient appointments, plus fabrication of a
temporary restoration. These factors, along with laboratory fees, contribute to the greater cost of indirect
restorations as compared to direct restorations. However, while indirect tooth-colored inlays and onlays are
more expensive than direct restorations (amalgams or
composites), they are usually less costly than more
invasive esthetic alternatives, such as all-ceramic or
porcelain-fused-to-metal (PFM) crowns.
Technique sensitivity-Restorations made using indirect techniques require a high level of operator skill.
A devotion to excellence is necessary during preparation, impression, try-in, cementation, and finishing
the restoration. Diligence is required during all stages
of the process to obtain a high-quality restoration.
Brittleness of ceramics-A ceramic restoration can fracture if the preparation does not provide adequate
thickness to resist occlusal forces and/or if the restoration is not appropriately supported by the cement
medium and the preparation. Fractures can occur either during try-in or after cementation, especially in

Reduced

polymerization

CHAPTER

14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

patients who generate unusually high occlusal forces.
Wear of opposing dentition and restorations-Ceramic
materials can cause excessive wear of opposing
enamel and/or restorations.
Recent improvements
in ceramics have reduced this problem, but ceramics,
particularly if rough and unpolished, can wear opposing teeth and restorations.
Resin-to-resin bonding difficulties-Laboratory-processed
composites are highly cross-linked, so few double
bonds remain available for chemical adhesion of the
composite cement . 44 Therefore the composite restoration must be mechanically abraded and/or chemically treated to facilitate adhesion of the cement .
The bond between the indirect composite restoration
and the composite cement is the weak link in the system. However, bonding of composite cements to properly treated ceramic restorations is not a problem . 43
Short clinical track record-Indirect bonded toothcolored restorations have become relatively popular
only in recent years and are still not placed by many
practitioners. Few controlled clinical trials are available, so the long-term durability of these restorations,
although expected to be good, is not particularly well
documented .
• Low potential for repair-Indirect restorations, particularly ceramic inlays/onlays, are difficult to repair in
the event of a partial fracture. If the fracture occurs in
the restoration, an indirect composite inlay or onlay
can be repaired using an adhesive system and a lightcured restorative composite. The bond strengths of
indirect composite repair and direct composite repair
appear to be equivalent .24 When a partial fracture occurs in a ceramic inlay/onlay, repair is usually not a
definitive treatment. The actual procedure (mechanical roughening, etching with hydrofluoric acid, and
application of a silane coupling agent before restoring
with an adhesive and composite) is relatively simple.
However, because ceramic inlays/onlays are indicated
in areas where occlusal wear, esthetics, and resistance
are important, direct composite repairs are not suitable because that composite will be exposed to a challenging environment.
Difficult intraoral polishing-Indirect composite restorations can be polished intraorally with the same instruments/materials used to polish direct composites. Ceramics, on the other hand, are more difficult to
polish after they have been cemented because of either (1) limited access or (2) lack of appropriate instrumentation (see the later section Finishing and Polishing Procedures).
LABORATORY-PROCESSED COMPOSITE
I NLAYS AND ONLAYS

The physical properties of composite restorations are improved when the composite is free of voids, and the resin
matrix is maximally polymerized. Generating dense,

well-cured restorations is best accomplished in the dental laboratory using devices that polymerize the composite under pressure, vacuum, inert gas, intense light,
heat, or a combination of these conditions. 15,19,38,40 Several
commercial systems use these techniques to optimize the
physical properties of their composite materials.
Laboratory-processed composite inlays and onlays are
more resistant to occlusal wear than direct composites,
particularly in occlusal contact areas . 7 However, they
are less wear-resistant than ceramic restorations. 29 They
offer easy adjustment, low wear of the opposing dentition, good esthetics, and potential for repair. Processed
composite restorations are indicated when: (1) maximum wear resistance is desired from a composite restoration, (2) achievement of proper contours and contacts would otherwise be difficult, and (3) a ceramic
restoration is not indicated because of cost or concerns
about wear of the opposing dentition. Regarding the
latter, the indirect composite would likely cause less
wear of the opposing dentition than a similar ceramic
restoration.
A clinical trial on indirect composite inlays compared
the performance of a heat- and pressure-cured microfill
composite (Concept [Ivoclar Vivadent, Amherst, New
York], which is no longer available) and gold restorations over 7 years. 13 Statistically, there was no difference
between the two materials. However, the failure rate of
the composite inlays in molars approached 50%, indicating that the composite material was better suited for
use in premolars.
Several more complex laboratory-processed composites have been introduced recently. These are often
called polymer glasses, filled polymers, or ceramic-optimized
resins (ceromers). Manufacturers of these materials have
recommended their use not only for inlays and onlays
and some single-unit crowns, but also, with fiber reinforcement, for splints and short-span fixed partial
dentures.
Although each manufacturer's system has unique aspects, the fabrication steps for one representative system can be summarized as follows:
1. The indirect composite restoration is initially formed
on a replica of the prepared tooth (Figs. 14-3 and 14-4).
2. The composite is built up in layers, polymerizing
each layer with a brief exposure to a visible lightcuring unit (Fig. 14-5).
3. After it is built to full contour, the restoration is
coated with a special gel to block out air and thus
prevent formation of an oxygen-inhibited surface
layer.
4. Final curing is accomplished by inserting the inlay
into an ovenlike device that exposes the composite to
additional light and heat (Fig. 14-6).
5. The cured composite inlay is trimmed, finished, and
polished in the laboratory (Figs. 14-7 and 14-8).

CHAPTER

14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

FIG . 14-3

FIG . 14-5

Die prepared for making laboratory-processed composite inlay.

FIG

14-4

Composite is added incrementally to form the inlay.

CERAMIC INLAYS AND ONLAYS
Ceramic inlays and onlays have become popular not
only because of patient demand for esthetic, durable restorative materials, but also because of recent improvements in materials, fabrication techniques, and bonding
systems. Among the ceramic materials used are feldspathic porcelain, hot pressed ceramics, and machinable
ceramics designed for use with CAD/CAM systems.
The physical and mechanical properties of ceramics
come closer to matching those of enamel than do composites. They have excellent wear resistance and a coef-

Curing composite with curing light.

FIG

14-6 Example of a curing device for additional polymeri zation. (Courtesy of Kerr Corporation.)

ficient of thermal expansion very close to that of tooth
structure. Some other physical properties of representative ceramics are shown in Table 14-1.
Feldspathic Porcelain Inlays and Onlays. Dental
porcelains are partially crystalline minerals (feldspar, silica, alumina) dispersed in a glass matrix.' Porcelain restorations are made from finely ground ceramic powders
that are mixed with distilled water or a special liquid,
shaped into the desired form, then fired and fused together to form a translucent, material that looks like tooth
structure. Currently, many ceramic inlays and onlays are

CHAPTER

FIG

14-7

14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

Finishing composite inlay on die.

fabricated in the dental laboratory by firing dental porcelains on refractory dies. The fabrication steps for fired ceramic inlays and onlays can be summarized as follows:
1. After tooth preparation, an impression is made and a
"master' working cast is poured of die stone (Fig. 14-9).
2. The die is duplicated and poured with a refractory
investment capable of withstanding porcelain firing
temperatures. The duplication method must result in
the master die and the refractory die being accurately
interchangeable (Fig. 14-10).
3. Porcelain is added into the preparation area of the refractory die and fired in an oven. Multiple increments
and firings are necessary to compensate for sintering
shrinkage (Fig. 14-11).
4. The ceramic restoration is recovered from the refractory die, cleaned of all investment, and seated on the
master die and working cast for final adjustments
and finishing (Fig. 14-12).

FIG

14-8

Composite inlay, polished and ready for delivery.

Many dental laboratories use this technique to fabricate ceramic inlays and onlays because of its low startup cost. The ceramic powders and investments are relatively inexpensive, and the technique is compatible with
most existing ceramic laboratory equipment such as firing furnaces. The major disadvantage of this technique
is its technique sensitivity. Although some technicians
can routinely fabricate these restorations with excellent
marginal integrity, many dentists complain of problems
with fit and strength. Inlays and onlays fabricated with
this technique must be handled very gently during tryin to avoid fracture. Even after cementation, the incidence of fracture is rather high for this type of ceramic
restorations'
Hot Pressed Glass Ceramics. In 1968, it was discovered that certain glasses could be modified with nucleating agents and, upon heat treatment, be changed into
ceramics with organized crystalline forms. Such "glassceramics" were stronger, had a higher melting point

CHAPTER

14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

than noncrystalline glass, and had variable coefficients
of thermal expansion .35 At first, these glass-ceramics
were primarily developed for cookware and other heatresistant products. In 1984, the glass-ceramic material
Dicor (Dentsply International, York, Pennsylvania) was
patented and rapidly became a popular ceramic for dental restorations. A major disadvantage of Dicor was its
translucency, which necessitated external application of
all shading.

Dicor restorations were made using a lost-wax, centrifugal casting process. Newer leucite-reinforced glassceramic systems also use the lost-wax method, but the
material is heated to a high temperature and pneumatically pressed, rather than centrifuged, into a mold.
Although some studies indicate that hot pressed ceramics are not significantly stronger than fired feldspathic
porcelains ;.1° they do appear to provide better clinical
service 21,32

FIG

FIG.

14-9 Master cast for MOD ceramic inlay. Die spacer is usually applied to axial walls and pulpal floor before duplication.

FIG 14-10 Master die is impressed, then a duplicate die is
poured with refractory investment.

14-11 Dental porcelains are added and fired in increments until inlay is the correct shape.

FIG 14-12 Inlay is cleaned of all investment, then seated on
master die for final adjustments and finishing. Ceramic inlay is
now ready for delivery. (Courtesy of Dr. G. Sheen.)

CHAPTER

14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

The fabrication steps for one type of leucite-reinforced
hot pressed ceramic restoration are summarized as
follows:
1. After tooth preparation, an impression is made and a
master working cast is poured of die stone. A wax
pattern of the restoration is made using conventional
techniques (Fig. 14-13).
2. After spruing (Fig. 14-14), investing, and wax pattern
bum-out, a shaded ceramic ingot and aluminum oxide
plunger are placed into a special furnace (Fig. 14-15).
3. At approximately 1100° C, the ceramic ingot becomes
plastic and is slowly pressed into the mold by an automated mechanism.
4. The restoration is seated on the master die and working cast for final adjustments and finishing (Fig. 14-16).
5. To accurately reproduce the tooth shade, a heavily pigmented surface stain is typically applied (Fig. 14-17).

FIG 14-13

Wax pattern for ceramic inlay. (Courtesy of Ivoclar

Vivadent.)

FIG 14-14 Wax pattern on sprue base, ready to be invested.
(Courtesy of Ivoclar Vivadent.)

FIG . 14-15

Device for pressing heated ceramic. (Courtesy of
Ivoclar, North America.)

FIG . 14-16 Ceramic inlay as pressed and before surface characterization. (Courtesy of IvoclarVivadent.)

FIG

14-17

I nlay following surface characterization. (Courtesy

of Ivoclar Vivadent.)

CHAPTER

14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

A

B

FIG 14-18 CEREC 2 (A) and CEREC 3 (B) CAD/CAM devices. These chairside units are compact
and mobile. (Courtesy of Sirona USA.)

The ceramic ingots are relatively translucent and
available in a variety of shades, so staining for inlay
and onlay restorations is typically rather minimal.
The advantages of hot pressed ceramics are their
(1) similarity to traditional "wax-up" processes, (2) excellent marginal fit, and (3) relatively high strength. The
surface hardness and occlusal wear of these ceramics
are very similar to enamel." 33,46 Although pressed ceramic inlays are stronger than porcelain inlays made
on refractory dies, they are still quite fragile until cemented. The incidence of postcementation fracture for
pressed ceramic inlays is expected to be lower than that
for ceramic inlays fired on refractory dies, but higher
than for inlays made with CAD/CAM systems. However, little information is available comparing the various systems.
CAD/CAM. Rapid improvements in technology have
spawned several computerized devices that can fabricate ceramic inlays and onlays from high-quality ceramics in a matter of minutes. Some CAD/CAM systems
are very expensive laboratory-based units requiring the
submission of an impression or working cast of the prepared tooth. The CEREC system was the first commercially available CAD/CAM system developed for the
rapid chairside design and fabrication of ceramic restorations. The 2001 versions of this device are the CEREC 2
and CEREC 3 (Sirona USA, Charlotte, North Carolina)
(Fig. 14-18).
Generation of a CEREC restoration begins after the
dentist prepares the tooth and uses a scanning device to
collect information about the shape of the preparation
and its relationship with the surrounding structures (Fig.
14-19). This step is termed an optical impression. A video

FIG 14-19 An optical impression is made by placing a small
video camera or scanner over the prepared tooth. (Courtesy of
Sirona USA.)
image of the prepared tooth is displayed to ensure
proper positioning of the scanning device. The CEREC
systems use the optical techniques of Moire fringe displacement and active triangulation to measure the
height and depth of the preparation.
The system projects an image of the preparation and
surrounding structures on a monitor, allowing the dentist or auxiliary personnel to use the CAD portion of the
system to design the restoration. The operator must input and/or confirm some of the boundaries of the restoration, such as the position of the gingival margins
(Fig. 14-20).
Once the restoration has been designed, the computer
directs a micromilling device (CAM portion of the system), which mills the restoration out of a block of high-

C H A P T E R 14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

FIG
14-20 The restoration i s designed on the computer
screen by drawing position of gingival margins and proximal
contacts. (Courtesy of Sirona USA.)

quality ceramic or composite in a matter of minutes (Fig.
14-21). The restoration is removed from the milling device, ready for try-in and cementation.
The CEREC systems are designed to be used chairside,
which eliminates the need for a conventional impression,
temporary restoration, and multiple appointments. In
addition to the speed of these systems, a major advantage
is the quality of the restorative material. Manufacturers
make blocks of "machinable ceramics" or "machinable
composites" specifically for computer-assisted milling
devices. Because these materials are fabricated under
ideal industrial conditions, their physical properties have
been optimized.
The major disadvantages of CAD/CAM systems are
high cost and the need for extra training. However,
CAD/CAM technology is changing rapidly, with each
new generation of devices having more capability, accuracy, and ease of use .
CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Many of the clinical procedures described are common to
both laboratory-fabricated and CAD/CAM restorations.
Some specific procedural details for CAD/CAM restorations are described in the sections CAD/CAM Techniques and Clinical Procedures for CAD/CAM Inlays
and Onlays.

B

FIG . 14-21 A, Computer-driven software controls two small,
diamond-coated milling devices that cut the restoration out of
a block of high-quality ceramic. B, The ceramic block rotates
as the diamond cutting instruments move as needed to generate the restoration. (Courtesy of Sirona USA.)

TOOTH PREPARATION
Preparations for specific types of indirect tooth-colored
inlays and onlays may vary because of differences in
fabrication steps for each commercial system and variations in the physical properties of the restorative materials. (By definition, an onlay caps all cusps; an inlay
may cap none, or may cap all but one cusp.) Before beginning any procedure, the clinician should have decided what type of restoration is indicated, according to
the factors discussed in the previous sections in this
chapter. If the clinician is not familiar with the technique, it is helpful to consult the manufacturer's literature and, if necessary, the dental laboratory to ensure
the best results.
As a first clinical step, the patient should be anesthetized and the area isolated with rubber dam, preferentially. The compromised restoration (if present) is at
this point completely removed, and/or all the caries is
excavated. The walls are then restored to a more nearly
ideal form with a light-cured glass-ionomer liner/base
or a composite restorative material.
Preparations for indirect tooth-colored inlays and onlays basically are meant to provide adequate thickness
for the restorative material and at the same time a passive insertion pattern with rounded internal angles and
well-defined margins. All margins should have a 90degree butt-joint cavosurface angle to ensure marginal
strength of the restoration. All line and point angles, internal and external, should be rounded to avoid stress

CHAPTER

14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

concentrations in the restoration and tooth, thereby reducing the potential for fractures (Figs. 14-22,14-23, and
14-24) 5,30
The carbide bur or diamond used for tooth preparation should be a tapering instrument that creates occlusally divergent facial and lingual walls (Fig. 14-25).
Gingival-occlusal divergence allows for passive insertion and removal of the restoration (see Fig. 14-22). The
j unction of the sides and tip of the cutting instrument
should have a rounded design to avoid creating sharp,
stress-inducing internal angles in the preparation. Although the optimal gingival-occlusal divergence of the
preparation is unknown, it should be greater than the 2°
to 5° per wall recommended for cast metal inlays and
onlays. Divergence can be increased because the toothcolored restoration will be adhesively bonded and because very little pressure can be applied during try-in
and cementation. Throughout preparation, the cutting
instruments used to develop vertical walls are oriented
to a single path of draw, usually the long axis of the

tooth crown. The occlusal step should be prepared 1.5 to
2 mm in depth. Most composite and ceramic systems require that any isthmus and any groove extension be at
least 1.5 mm wide to decrease the possibility of fracture
of the restoration. Facial and lingual walls should be extended to sound tooth structure and should go around
the cusps in smooth curves. Ideally, there should be no
undercuts that would prevent the insertion or removal
of the restoration. Small undercuts, if present, can be
blocked out using a glass-ionomer liner. The pulpal floor
should be smooth and relatively flat. Following removal
of extensive caries or previous restorative material from
any internal wall, the wall is restored to more nearly
ideal form with a light-cured glass-ionomer liner/base.
The facial, lingual, and gingival margins of the proximal boxes should be extended to clear the adjacent tooth
by at least 0.5 mm. These clearances will provide adequate access to the margins for impression material and
for finishing and polishing instruments. For all walls, a
90-degree cavosurface margin is desired because com-

Rounded axiopulpal
li ne angle

Widened isthmus

FIG . 14-22 A, Mesioocclusal (MO) inlay preparation for tooth-colored inlay in maxillary first
premolar (occlusal view). Isthmus should be at least 1.5 to 2 mm wide to prevent inlay fracture.
Axiopulpal line angle should be rounded to avoid seating errors and to lower stress concentrations.'," B , MOD inlay preparation for tooth-colored inlay in maxillary first premolar (proximal
view). Pulpal floor should be prepared 1.5 mm in depth, and axiopulpal line angles should be
rounded. Interproximal margins should be extended to allow at least 0.5-mm clearance of contact with neighboring tooth. Gingival margins in enamel are greatly preferred.

FIG 14-23 A, MODL inlay preparation on maxillary first premolar (occlusal view). B, MODL inl ay preparation on maxillary first premolar, proximal view. The lingual cusp has been reduced
and the lingual margin extended beyond any possible contact with opposing tooth by prepari ng a "collar." Working cusps require 1.5 to 2 mm of occlusal reduction. All internal and external line angles are rounded.

C H A P T E R 14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

posite and ceramic inlays are fragile in thin cross-section.
The gingival margin should be extended as minimally as
possible because margins in enamel are greatly preferred
for bonding and because deep gingival margins are difficult to impress and to isolate properly during cementation. When a portion of the facial or lingual surface is affected by caries or other defect, it may be necessary to
extend the preparation (with a gingival shoulder) around
the transitional line angle to include the defect. The axial
wall of the shouldered extension should be prepared to
allow for adequate restoration thickness.
When extending through or along cuspal inclines to
reach sound tooth structure, a cusp usually should be
capped if the extension is two thirds or greater than the
distance from any primary groove to the cusp tip (see
Figs. 14-23 and 14-24). If cusps must be capped, they
should be reduced 1.5 to 2 mm and should have a 90degree cavosurface angle. When capping cusps, especially centric holding cusps, it may be necessary to prepare a shoulder to move the facial or lingual cavosurface
margin away from any possible contact with the opposing tooth, either in maximum intercuspal position or

during functional movements. Such contacts directly on
margins can lead to premature deterioration of marginal
integrity. The axial wall of the resulting shoulder should
be sufficiently deep to allow for adequate thickness of
the restorative material and should have the same path
of draw as the main portion of the preparation.
During preparation, stains on the external walls, such
as those often left by corrosion products of old amalgam
restorations, should be removed. (This comment does
not apply to stained, noncarious dentin on pulpal and axial walls, of course.) Such stains could appear as black or
gray lines at the margin after cementation. It is especially
critical to generously round all line and point angles, internal and external, to avoid areas of stress concentrations that could later lead to fracture of the restoration.
I MPRESSION
Most tooth-colored indirect inlay/onlay systems require
an impression of the prepared tooth and the adjacent
teeth as well as interocclusal records, which allow the
restoration to be fabricated on a working cast in the laboratory (see Chapter 20).

A

B

FIG 14-24 MODFL inlay preparation on maxillary right first molar. Distofacial, mesiolingual,
and distolingual cusps are reduced. A, Occlusal view. B, Facial view.

FIG

14-25 Typical diamond instruments used for ceramic inl ay/onlay tooth preparation.

CHAPTER 14

Classes I and I I Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

TEMPORARY RESTORATION

A provisional restoration is necessary when using indirect systems that require two appointments. The temporary protects the pulp-dentin complex in vital teeth,
maintains the position of the prepared tooth in the arch,
and protects the soft tissues adjacent to prepared areas.
The temporary restoration can be made using conventional techniques and acrylic resins or bis-acryl composite materials (see Chapter 20). Care should be taken to
avoid the bonding of the temporary material to the preparation at this phase of the procedure. A lubricant of
some sort may be applied to the preparation if desired,
especially if a resin-based material was used to block
out undercuts and level the walls of the preparation.
Temporary restorations for PFM and cast gold restorations typically are cemented with eugenol-based temporary cements. However, eugenol is believed to interfere
with resin polymerization 41 and could potentially reduce
the adhesion of the permanent composite cement to
tooth structure. Although some studies report this does
not occur if the tooth is pumiced before cementation of
the permanent restoration , 45 use of a noneugenol temporary cement is recommended. For exceptionally nonretentive preparations, or when the temporary phase is
expected to last longer than 2 to 3 weeks, zinc phosphate cement can be used to increase retention of the
temporary restoration.
CAD/CAM TECHNIQUES

Clinical procedures for CAD/CAM systems such as the
CEREC differ somewhat from the procedures previously described. Tooth preparations for CAD/CAM inlays must reflect the capabilities of the CAD software
and hardware and the CAM milling devices that fabricate the restorations. One example of how preparations
are modified when using the CEREC system pertains to
undercuts. Laboratory-fabricated indirect systems require the preparation to have a path of draw that allows
insertion and removal of the restoration without interferences from undercuts. However, the CEREC system
automatically "blocks out" any undercuts during the optical impression (Fig. 14-26). Occlusally convergent walls
can result in a more conservative preparation along the
occlusal aspect, especially when replacing old amalgam
restorations, which were prepared with such undercuts
for retention. Care should be taken, however, not to allow
excessive undercuts especially at the base of the cusps.
These undercut areas eventually will be filled with the
composite cement, and these materials lack the properties to act as "dentin replacement." Also, large undercuts may result in undetected internal voids during cementation, which could lead to dramatic failures. The
facial and lingual walls of the proximal boxes should be
prepared without undercuts and with draw to avoid excessively wide composite cement lines.

FIG. 14-26 A, MODE inlay preparation for ceramic inlay on
maxillary first molar. B, Preparation coated with special powder
for capture with optical impression by CEREC device. C, Optical
i mpression. Any internal undercuts would be blocked out by
the CEREC device.

Using the CEREC system, an experienced dentist can
prepare the tooth, fabricate an inlay, and deliver it in approximately 1 hour (Fig. 14-27). This system eliminates
the need for a conventional impression, temporary restoration, and multiple patient appointments.

CHAPTER

14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

B
FIG

14-27 A, CEREC inlay being milled. B, Completed inlay.

FIG 14-28 A, Initial try-in of CEREC inlay. Proximal contacts are too tight and must be adjusted.
B, Inlay seated after contact adjustment. Proximal surfaces of the inlay must be polished before
cementation.

TRY-IN AND CEMENTATION
The try-in and cementation of tooth-colored inlays /
onlays are more demanding than that for cast metal restorations because of: (1) the relatively fragile nature of
the ceramic or composite material, (2) the requirement
of near-perfect moisture control, and (3) the use of composite cements. The ceramic or composite inlay is relatively fragile until it is bonded in place with composite
cement. Very little pressure should be applied to the
restoration during try-in. Because of this fragility, occlusal evaluation and adjustment are delayed until after
cementation.
Preliminary Steps. The use of the rubber dam should
be strongly considered to prevent moisture contamination of the conditioned tooth and/or restoration surfaces
during cementation, as well as to improve access and
visibility during restoration delivery. After removing
the temporary restoration, all the temporary cement is
cleaned from preparation walls.

Restoration Try-in and Proximal Contact Adjustment. The inlay or onlay is placed into the preparation

using very light pressure to evaluate its fit. If the restoration does not seat completely, the most likely cause is an
overcontoured proximal surface (Fig. 14-28). Using the
mouth mirror where needed, the embrasures should be
viewed from the facial, lingual, and occlusal aspects to
determine where the proximal contour needs adjustment
to allow final seating of the restoration, while simultaneously producing the correct position and form of the
contact. Passing thin dental floss through the contact(s)
will reveal the tightness and position, thus signifying
to the experienced operator the degree and location of
excess contact (see Chapter 20). Articulating papers also
can be successfully used to identify overtight proximal
contacts. Abrasive disks are used to adjust the proximal
contour and contact relationship. While adjusting the
intensity and location of the proximal contacts, successively finer grits of abrasive disks are used to polish the

CHAPTER

14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

proximal surfaces because they will be inaccessible for
polishing after cementation.
If the proximal contours are not overcontoured, and
the restoration still does not fit completely, the preparation should be checked again for residual temporary
materials or debris. If the preparation is clean, internal
and/or marginal interferences might also prevent the
restoration from seating completely. Once these interferences have been identified through careful visual inspection of the margins and/or using "fit-checker" materials, they should be adjusted on the restoration, on
the preparation, or both. Fortunately, these interferences
are rare because contemporary impression materials and
ceramic systems are very accurate, and the laboratory
usually applies a die-spacer on the internal aspects of
the preparation to avoid difficulties in seating the restoration. In the event of a significant discrepancy between
the preparation and the inlay/onlay, a new impression
must be taken.
Marginal fit is verified after the restoration is completely seated. Slight excesses of contour can be removed,
if access allows, using fine-grit diamond instruments or
30-fluted carbide finishing burs. These adjustments are
preferably done after the restoration is cemented, to
avoid marginal fractures. Most indirect tooth-colored
restorations have slightly larger marginal gaps than comparable gold restorations . 36,51
Cementation. For proper adhesive bonding, the internal surface of the inlay/onlay must be treated before
cementation. The techniques and materials vary, depending on the specific restorative system used.
For most laboratory-processed composite inlays/
onlays, the resin matrix has been polymerized to such an
extent that few bonding sites are available for the composite cement to chemically bond to the internal surfaces
of the restoration. To improve the bond of the cement to
the processed composite restoration, some systems require the use of a solvent to soften the internal surfaces
of the restoration before cementation. 54 Other systems
recommend sandblasting (air-abrading) the inside of the
composite restoration with aluminum-oxide abrasive
particles to increase surface roughness and surface area
for bonding.
For ceramic inlays and onlays, hydrofluoric acid is
usually used to etch the internal surfaces of the restoration (Fig. 14-29). 22 Such acid-etching increases surface
relief and therefore not only increases the surface area,
but also results in micromechanical bonding of the
composite cement to the ceramic restoration. Hydrofluoric acid-etching is usually done by the laboratory.
However, the clinician should check the internal surface
of the restoration to confirm the etching, which is evident
by a white-opaque appearance similar to acid-etched
enamel. Chairside ceramic etching is done with a 2minute application of 10% hydrofluoric acid on the internal surfaces of the inlay/onlay. After etching, the ceramic

is treated with a silane coupling agent to facilitate chemical bonding of the composite cement.
Clear plastic matrix strips may be applied in each affected proximal area and wedged (Fig. 14-30, A). Care
should be taken to avoid interference of the wedges
with the seating of the restoration. The inlay/onlay can
be tried in again and checked for fit (see Fig. 14-30, B).
The preparation surfaces are etched (Fig. 14-31, A) and
treated with the components of an appropriate enamel/
dentin bonding system (see Chapter 5). Typically, the final step of the bonding system (e.g., an unfilled resin)
also is applied to the internal surfaces of the restoration
previously etched and silanated. A dual-cure composite
cement is mixed and inserted into the preparation with
a paddle-shaped instrument or a syringe. The internal
surfaces of the restoration also are coated with the composite cement (see Fig. 14-31, B and C), and the inlay is
immediately inserted into the prepared tooth, using light
pressure. A ball burnisher applied with a slight vibrating motion is usually sufficient to seat the restoration
(see Fig. 14-31, D). Excess composite cement is removed
with thin-bladed composite instruments, brushes, or an
explorer (see Fig. 14-31, E and F). The operator must be
careful not to remove composite from the marginal interface between the tooth and the inlay. The cement is
now light-cured from occlusal, facial, and lingual directions for a minimum exposure of 60 seconds from each
direction (see Fig. 14-31, G) . 37
FINISHING AND POLISHING PROCEDURES

After light-curing the cement, the plastic matrix strips
and the wedges are removed, and the setting of the composite cement is verified. All marginal areas are checked
with an explorer tine. Because wedges and matrix were
used interproximally, these areas-which are difficult to
finish-should feel quite smooth, with little if any com-

FIG 14-29 Applying hydrofluoric acid to internal surface of
ceramic inlay. After rinsing and drying, etched ceramic surfaces should have a "frosty" white appearance.

CHAPTER

14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

posite flash extending beyond the margins in a gingival
direction.
For ceramic restorations, medium- or fine-grit diamond
instruments are used initially to remove any excess composite cement back to the margin. Care must be taken to
preserve the glazed surface of ceramic restorations as
much as possible. Slender flame shapes are used inter-

proximally (Fig. 14-32, A), while larger oval or cylindric
shapes are used on the occlusal surface. After using the
fine-grit diamond instruments, 30-fluted carbide finishing burs are used to obtain a smoother finish (see Fig.
14-32, B) .26 For indirect composite restorations, finishing
may be started with 12-fluted carbide finishing burs instead of diamonds.

B
FIG 14-30 A, Clear plastic matrix strips are applied and wedged before etching and cementation. B, The fit of the inlay is verified with the matrix and wedges in place.

FIG

14-31 A, Enamel and dentin are etched with phosphoric acid. B, Dual-cured composite cement is applied to inlay. C, After application of the adhesive system, cement is applied to the
preparation. D, CEREC ceramic inlay is seated into preparation.
Continued

C H A P T E R 14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

FIG . 14-31, Cont'd E and F, Before curing, excess composite cement is removed with explorer,
brushes, and IPC carver. G, The composite cement is light-cured from occlusal, facial, and lingual directions.

FIG . 14-32 A, Slender, fine-grit, flame-shaped, diamond instruments are used to remove flash
along facial and lingual margins of CEREC ceramic inlay. B, 30-fluted finishing burs are used to
smooth areas that were adjusted with diamonds.

Interproximally, a No. 12 surgical blade can be used to
remove excess composite cement when access permits
(Fig. 14-33, A). Abrasive strips of successively finer grits
also can be used to remove slight interproximal excesses
(see Fig. 14-33, B). Much care must be used to avoid

damaging the gingiva or the root surfaces when using
such instruments interproximally. With care and appropriate instrumentation, ceramic restorations can be polished to a surface smoother than glazed porcelain using
the abrasive sequence shown in Table 14-2.26 The same

C H A P T E R 14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

FIG 14-33 A, Removing excess composite cement using a surgical blade. B, Smoothing the interproximal area with abrasive finishing strip.

After occlusal adjustments are completed, the restoration must be repolished in all areas where corrections
have been made, especially in areas of ceramic restorations where the glaze may have been disrupted. Indirect
composite inlays and onlays can be polished using the
same instrumentation and materials used for direct
composites (see Chapter 13).

fine-grit diamonds used to adjust margins may be used
to adjust contour, followed by the use of 30-fluted carbide finishing burs. Further smoothing is accomplished
with a series of rubber abrasive points and cups used at
slow speed with air-water spray (Fig. 14-34, A). Final
polishing of the ceramic restoration may be achieved by
applying a diamond polishing paste with a bristle brush
or another suitable instrument (see Fig. 14-34, B). Ceramic restorations properly polished with this series of
instruments have a remarkably beautiful, smooth surface (see Fig. 14-34, C).
After all excess composite cement has been removed,
marginal integrity has been verified, and the restoration
has been polished as needed, the rubber dam is removed.
The occlusion is now checked and adjusted if necessary.
With good occlusal records and careful laboratory work,
little if any correction should be necessary. Premature
occlusal contacts can be adjusted using fine-grit diamond
instruments, followed by 30-fluted carbide finishing
burs, if the adjustments are made in the restoration.
In selected cases, the occlusion can be adjusted on the
opposing dentition. This is only feasible if such adjustment is done to correct the occlusal plane of the opposing teeth, or to reduce a pronounced cusp present on the
tooth opposing the restoration to avoid occlusal trauma.

CLINICAL PROCEDURES FOR CAD/CAM
I NLAYS AND ONLAYS
When delivering a CAD/CAM inlay, more adjustments
are usually necessary when trying-in, finishing, and
polishing. The original CEREC system milled the occlusal surface relatively flat without any significant surface detail, and did not take into account the opposing
occlusion. The newer CEREC 2 and 3 systems are able to
mill in occlusal contours in a variety of manners. They
can extrapolate existing contours beyond the cavosurface margin to the central groove, or they can build the
surface up to the level of a scanned wax bite. The neighboring teeth, in particular the marginal ridges and cusp
heights, also can be used as references for the design of
the occlusal surface of a CAD/CAM restoration. If the
preoperative contours of the tooth were satisfactory, the
system can reproduce them in the restoration. When adj usting the occlusion of a CAD/CAM inlay, it may be
necessary to use medium-grit diamonds with air-water
spray coolant for initial contouring of the occlusal surface, followed by the instrumentation previously discussed for finishing and polishing. An arch containing
several CEREC CAD/CAM inlays is shown in Fig. 14-35.
COMMON PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS
The most common cause of failure of tooth-colored inlays and onlays is bulk fracture. If bulk fracture occurs, replacement of the restoration is almost always
indicated.

CHAPTER

14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

14-34 Polishing sequence for ceramic inlays. A, After using fine-grit diamonds and 30-fluted
carbide finishing burs to adjust contours and margins (as shown in Fig. 14-32), rubber abrasive
points and cups of successively finer grits are used at slow speed. B, Final polish imparted by
porcelain polishing paste applied with bristle brush. C, Occlusal view of polished ceramic inlay.
FIG

14-35 A, Preoperative view. B, Postoperative view of maxillary arch containing several
CEREC inlays.
FIG .

REPAIR OF TOOTH-COLORED
I NLAYS AND ONLAYS
Minor defects in indirect composite and ceramic restorations can be repaired with relative ease. Of course,
before initiating any repair procedure, the operator
should determine whether replacement rather than repair is the appropriate treatment. If repair is deemed to
be the appropriate treatment, the dentist should attempt

to identify the cause of the problem and correct it if possible. For example, a small fracture due to occlusal trauma
may indicate that some adjustment of the opposing occlusion is required.
For both composite and ceramic inlays, the repair
procedure is initiated by mechanical roughening of the
involved surface. While a coarse diamond may be used,
a better result is obtained with the use of air-abrading or

C H A PT E R 14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

grit-blasting with aluminum oxide particles and a special intraoral device . 50,53
For ceramic restorations, the initial mechanical roughening is followed by brief (typically 2 minutes) application of 10% hydrofluoric acid gel. Hydrofluoric acid
etches the surface, creating further microdefects to facilitate mechanical bonding. Although many indirect composites contain etchable glass filler particles, hydrofluoric acid treatment of composites is neither necessary nor
recommended . 53,54 However, a brief application of phosphoric acid may be used to clean the composite surface
after roughening.
The next step in the repair procedure is application of
a silane coupling agent. Silanes mediate chemical bonding between ceramics and resins and also may improve
the predictability of resin-resin repairs . 31 The manufacturer's guidelines should be followed when using silanes, as they can differ substantially from one particular product to another.
After the silane has been applied, a resin-bonding
agent is applied and light-cured. A composite of the appropriate shade is placed, cured, contoured, and polished (see Chapter 13).

SUMMARY
Advances in ceramic, composite, and adhesive technology have resulted in the development of a variety of
tooth-colored indirect restorations. These offer an excellent alternative to direct composite restorations, especially for large restorations, and are more conservative
than full-coverage restorations. However, because the
clinical procedures are relatively technique-sensitive,
proper case selection, operator skill, and attention to detail are critical to success.

REFERENCES
1. Al-Hiyasat AS, Saunders WP, Smith GM: Three-body wear
associated with three ceramics and enamel, J Prosthet Dent
82(4):476-481, 1999.
2. Anusavice KJ: Development and testing of ceramics for dental restorations. In Fischman G, Clare A, Hench J, editors: Bicceramics: materials and applications, Westerville, OH, 1995, The
American Ceramic Society.
3. Anusavice KJ, editor: Phillips'science of dental materials, ed 10,
Philadelphia, 1996, WB Saunders.
4. Ausiello P et al: Fracture resistance of end odontically-treated
premolars adhesively restored, Am J Dent 10(5):237-241,
1997.
5. Banks RG: Conservative posterior ceramic restorations: a literature review, J Prosthet Dent 63(6):619-626, 1990.
6. Berg NG, Derand T: A 5-year evaluation of ceramic inlays
(CEREC), Swed Dent J 21(4):121-127, 1997.
7. Burgoyne AR, Nicholls JI, Brudvik JS: In vitro two-body wear
of inlay-onlay composite resin restoratives, J Prosthet Dent
65(2):206-214, 1991.
8. Burke FJT Wilson NHF, Watts DC: The effect of cuspal coverage
on the fracture resistance of teeth restored with indirect composite resin restorations, Quintessence Int 24(12):875-880, 1993.

9. Cattell MJ, Clarke RL, Lynch EJ: The transverse strength, reliability and microstructural features of four dental ceramicspart 1, J Dent 25(5):399-407, 1997.
10. Cattell MJ, Clarke RL, Lynch EJ: The biaxial flexure strength
and reliability of four dental ceramics-part 11, J Dent
25(5):409-414, 1997.
11. DeLong R, Sasik C, Pintado MR, Douglas WH: The wear of
enamel when opposed by ceramic systems, Dent Mater
5(7):266-271, 1989.
12. Dietschi D et al: Marginal adaptation and seal of direct and
indirect Class II composite resin restorations: an in vitro evaluation, Quintessence Int 26(2):127-138, 1995.
13. Donly KJ, Jensen ME, Triolo P, et al: A clinical comparison of
resin composite inlay and onlay posterior restorations and
cast-gold restorations at 7 years, Quintessence Int 30(3):163168,1999.
14. Douglas WH, Fields RP, Fundingsland J: A comparison between
the microleakage of direct and indirect composite restorative
systems, J Dent 17(4):184-188, 1989.
15. Eldiwany M, Powers JM, George LA: Mechanical properties
of direct and post-cured composites, Am J Dent 6(5):222-224,
1993.
16. El-Kalla IH, Garcia-Godoy F: Saliva contamination and bond
strength of single-bottle adhesives to enamel and dentin, Am
J Dent 10(2):83-87, 1997.
17. Feigal RJ, Hitt J, Splieth C: Retaining sealant on salivary contaminated enamel, J Am Dent Assoc 124(3):88-97, 1993.
18. Feilzer AJ, deGee AJ, Davidson CL: Increased wall-to-wall
curing contraction in thin bonded layers, J Dent Res 68(l):4850,1989.
19. Ferracane JL, Condon JR: Post-cure heat treatments for composites: properties and fractography, Dent Mater 8(5):290295,1992.
20. Ferrari M et al: Influence of tissue characteristics at margins
on leakage of Class II indirect porcelain restorations, Am J
Dent 12(3):134-142, 1999.
21. Fradeani M, Aquilano A, Bassein L: Longitudinal study of
pressed glass-ceramic inlays for four and a half years, J Prosthet Dent 78(4):346-353, 1997.
22. Giordano RA: Dental ceramic restorative systems, Compendium 17(8):779-782,1996.
23. Gladys S et al: Clinical and semiquantitative marginal analysis of four tooth-coloured inlay systems at 3 years, J Dent
23(6):329-338, 1995.
24. Gregory WA et al: Physical properties and repair bond
strength of direct and indirect composite resins, J Prosthet
Dent 68(3):406-411, 1992.
25. Hayashi M, TsuchitaniY, Miura M et al: Six-year clinical evaluation of fired ceramic inlays, Oper Dent 23(6):318-326, 1998.
26. Haywood VB et al: Polishing porcelain veneers: an SEM and
specular reflectance analysis, Dent Mater 4(3):116-121, 1988.
27. Hench LL: Bioceramics: from concept to clinic, J Amer Ceram
Soc 74(7):1487-1570, 1991.
28. Heymann HO et al: The clinical performance of CAD-CAMgenerated ceramic inlays: a four-year study, J Am Dent Assoc
127(8):1171-1181, 1996.
29. Hudson JD, Goldstein GR Georgescu M: Enamel wear
caused by three different restorative materials, J Prosthet Dent
74(6):647-654, 1995.
30. Jackson RD: Indirect resin inlay and onlay restorations: a
comprehensive clinical overview, Practical Perio Aesthet Dent
11(8):891-900, 1999.
31. Jardel V et al: Correlation of topography to bond strength of
etched ceramic, Int J Prosthodont 12(1):59-64, 1999.

C H A P T E R 14

Classes I and II Indirect Tooth-Colored Restorations

32. Kramer N et al: IPS Empress inlays and onlays after four
years-a clinical study, J Dent 27(5):325-331, 1999.
33. Krejci I et al: Wear of ceramic inlays, their enamel antagonists,
and luting cements, JProsthet Dent 69(4):425-430, 1993.
34. Liberman R et al: The effect of posterior composite restorations on the resistance of cavity walls to vertically applied occlusal loads, J Oral Rehabil 17(1):99-105, 1990.
35. MacCulloch WT: Advances in dental ceramics, Br Dent J
124(8):361-365, 1968.
36. Mormann WH, Schug J: Grinding precision and accuracy of
fit of CEREC 2 CAD-CIM inlays, J Am Dent Assoc 128(l):4753,1997.
37. Myers ML, Caughman WF, Rueggeberg FA: Effect of restoration composition, shade, and thickness on the cure of a photoactivated resin cement, J Prosthodont 3(3):149-157, 1994.
38. Powers JM, Eldiwany M, Ladd GD: Effects of post-curing on
mechanical properties of a composite, Am J Dent 6(5):232234,1993.
39. Qualtrough AJ, Piddock V: Ceramics update, J Dent 25(2):9195,1997.
40. Reinhardt JW, Boyer DB, Stephens NH: Effects of secondary
curing on indirect posterior composite resins, Oper Dent
19(6):217-220, 1994.
41. Rosenstiel SF, Gegauff AG: Effect of provisional cementing
agents on provisional resins, J Prosthet Dent 59(1):29-33,1988.
42. Roulet J-F: Longevity of glass ceramic inlays and amalgamresults up to 6 years, Clin Oral Investig 1(1):40-46, 1997.
43. Roulet J-F, Soderholm KJM, Longmate J: Effects of treatment
and storage conditions on ceramic/composite bond strength,
J Dent Res 74(l):381-387,1995.
44. Ruyter, IE: Types of resin-based inlay materials and their
properties, Int Dent J 42(3):139-44, 1992.
45. Schwartz R, Davis R Hilton TJ: Effect of temporary cements
on the bond strength of a resin cement, Am J Dent 5(3):147150,1992.
46. Seghi RR, Denry 1L, Rosenstiel SF: Relative fracture toughness and hardness of new dental ceramics, J Prosthet Dent
74(2):145-150,1995.

47. Shortall AC et al: Marginal seal comparisons between resinbonded Class II porcelain inlays, posterior composite restorations, and direct composite resin inlays, Int J Prosthodont
2(3):217-223,1989.
48. Shortall AC, Baylis RL, Wilson HJ: Composite inlay/luting
resin bond strength-surface treatments, J Dent 24(1/2):129135,1996.
49. Soderholm KJM, Richards ND: Wear resistance of composites: a solved problem?, Gen Dent 46(3):256-263, 1998.
50. Stokes AN, Tay WM, Pereira BP: Shear bond strengths of resin
cement to post-cured hybrid composites, Dent Mater 6(6):
370-374,1993.
51. Sturdevant JR, Bayne SC, Heymann HO: Margin gap size of
ceramic inlays using second-generation CAD/CAM equipment, J Esthet Dent 11(4):206-214, 1999.
52. Sturdevant JR et al: Five-year study of two light-cured posterior composite resins, Dent Mater 4(3):105-110, 1988.
53. Swift EJ et al: Treatment of composite surfaces for indirect
bonding, Dent Mater 8(3):193-196, 1992.
54. Tate WH, DeSchepper EJ, Powers JM: Bond strength of resin
cements to a hybrid composite, Am J Dent 6(4):195-198,1993.
55. Taylor DF et al: Pooling of long-term clinical wear data for
posterior composites, Am J Dent 7(3):167-174, 1994.
56. Thompson JY, Bayne SC, Heymann HO: Mechanical properties of a new mica-based machinable glass ceramic for
CAD/CAM restorations, J Prosthet Dent 76(6):619-623, 1996.
57. van Dijken JW, Hoglund-Aberg C, Olofsson AL: Fired ceramic inlays: a 6-year follow-up, J Dent 26(3): 219-225, 1998.
58. Wendt SL: Microleakage and cusp fracture resistance of heattreated composite resin inlays, Am J Dent 4(1):10-1.4, 1991.
59. Wendt SL, Leinfelder KF: The clinical evaluation of heattreated composite resin inlays, J Am Dent Assoc 120(2):177181,1990.
60. Zuellig-Singer R Bryant RW: Three-year evaluation of computer-machined ceramic inlays-influence of luting agent,
Quintessence Int 29(9):573-582, 1998.

I.

II.

III.

I V.

V.

Artistic elements, 593
A. Shape or form, 594
B. Symmetry and proportionality, 595
C. Position and alignment, 596
D. Surface texture, 597
E. Color, 597
F. Translucency, 598
G. Clinical considerations, 599
Conservative alterations of tooth contours and
contacts, 599
A. Alterations of shape of natural teeth, 599
1. Etiology, 599
2. Treatment, 599
B. Alterations of embrasures, 601
1. Etiology, 601
2. Treatment, 601
C. Correction of diastemas, 601
1. Etiology, 601
2. Treatment,601
Conservative treatments for discolored teeth, 605
A. Extrinsic discolorations, 605
1. Etiology, 605
2. Treatment, 605
B. Intrinsic discolorations, 606
1. Etiology, 606
2. Treatment, 607
Bleaching treatments, 608
A. Nonvital bleaching procedures, 608
1. In-office nonvital bleaching technique, 608
2. " Walking" bleach technique, 609
B. Vital bleaching procedures, 609
1. In-office vital bleaching technique, 610
2. Dentist prescribed-home applied
technique, 610
Microabrasion and macroabrasion, 612
A. Microabrasion, 612
B. Macroabrasion, 613

VI.

Veneers, 615
A. Direct veneer techniques, 617
1. Direct partial veneers, 617
2. Direct full veneers, 618
B. Indirect veneer techniques, 620
1. Processed composite veneers, 621
2. Etched porcelain veneers, 624
3. Pressed ceramic veneers, 627
C. Veneers for metal restorations, 628
1. Veneers for existing metal restorations, 628
D. Repairs of veneers, 630
1. Veneers on tooth structure, 630
2. Faulty veneers in metal restorations, 631
VII. Acid-etched, resin-bonded splints, 632
A. Periodontally involved teeth, 632
1. Techniques for splinting anterior teeth, 632
B. Stabilization of teeth after orthodontic
treatment, 634
1. Technique, 634
C. Avulsed or partially avulsed teeth, 635
1. Technique, 635
VIII. Conservative bridges, 636
A. Natural tooth pontic, 636
1. Technique, 636
B. Denture tooth pontic, 638
1. Technique, 638
C. Porcelain-fused-to-metal pontic or all-metal
pontic with metal retainers, 640
1. Maxillary anterior bridge, 642
2. Mandibular anterior splint-and-bridge
combination, 644
3. Mandibular posterior bridge with metaland-porcelain pontic, 645
4. Maxillary bridge with porcelain-fused-tometal pontic, 646
5. Mandibular posterior bridge with metal
pontic, 646
D. All-porcelain pontic, 646
1. Technique, 648

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

C
Significant improvements in tooth-colored restorative
materials and adhesive techniques have resulted in numerous conservative esthetic treatment possibilities. Although restorative dentistry has enjoyed the distinction
of being a blend of art and science, conservative esthetic
dentistry truly emphasizes the artistic component. As Dr.
Ronald E. Goldstein states, "Esthetic dentistry is the art
of dentistry in its purest form."'- 'As with many forms of
art, conservative esthetic dentistry provides a means of
artistic expression that feeds on creativity and imagination. Dentists find performing conservative esthetic procedures to be most enjoyable, and patients appreciate
the immediate esthetic improvements rendered, often
without the need for local anesthesia.
One of the greatest assets a person can have is a smile
that shows beautiful, natural teeth (Fig. 15-1). Children
and teenagers are especially sensitive about unattractive
teeth. When teeth are discolored, malformed, crooked,
or missing, there is often a conscious effort to avoid
smiling and patients try to "cover up" the teeth. Correction of these types of dental problems can produce dramatic changes in appearance, which often result in improved confidence, personality, and social life.
The restoration of a smile is one of the most appreciated and gratifying services a dentist can render. In fact,
the positive psychologic effects of improving a patient's
smile often contribute to an improved self-image and
enhanced self-esteem. These improvements make conservative esthetic dentistry particularly gratifying for

the dentist and represent a new dimension of dental
treatment for patients.
This chapter presents conservative esthetic procedures in the context of their clinical applications. The
principles and clinical steps involved in adhesive bonding for the treatment alternatives discussed in this chapter are similar to those described earlier (see Chapters 11
to 14). Only specific conservative esthetic clinical procedures or variations from previously described techniques are presented in this chapter.

ARTISTIC ELEMENTS
Regardless of the result desired, certain basic artistic elements must be considered to ensure an optimally esthetic result. In conservative esthetic dentistry these
include:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Shape or form
Symmetry and proportionality
Position and alignment
Surface texture
Color
Translucency

Some or all of these elements are common to virtually
every conservative esthetic dental procedure; therefore a basic knowledge and understanding of these
artistic elements is required to attain esthetic results
consistently.

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-2 Cosmetic contouring. A, Anterior
teeth before treatment. B, By reshaping
teeth, a more feminine, youthful appearance
i s produced.

SHAPE OR FORM

The shape of teeth largely determines their esthetic appearance. To achieve optimal dental esthetics, it is imperative that natural anatomic forms be achieved.
Therefore a basic knowledge of normal tooth anatomy is
fundamental to the success of any conservative esthetic
dental procedure.
When viewing the clinical crown of an incisor from a
facial (or lingual) position, the crown outline is trapezoidal. However, subtle variations in shape and contour
produce very different appearances. For instance,
rounded incisal angles, open incisal and facial embrasures and softened facial line angles typically characterize a youthful, feminine smile. A more masculine smile,
or a smile characteristic of an older individual having
experienced attrition due to aging, typically exhibits incisal embrasures with more closed and prominent (i.e.,
less rounded) incisal angles. Frequently, minor modification of existing tooth contours, sometimes referred to
as cosmetic contouring, can effect a significant esthetic
change (see Alterations of Shape of Natural Teeth). Reshaping enamel by rounding incisal angles, opening incisal embrasures, and reducing prominent facial line angles can produce a more feminine, youthful appearance
(Fig. 15-2).
Significant generalized esthetic changes are possible
when treating all the anterior teeth (and also, occasionally, first premolars) visible in the patient's smile. This
fact is particularly true when placing full-coverage facial restorations, such as veneers (see Veneers). With this
treatment method, the dentist can produce significant
changes in tooth shapes and forms to yield a variety of
different appearances.
Although less extensive, restoring an individual tooth
rather than all anterior teeth simultaneously may, in
fact, require greater artistic ability. Generalized restoration of all anterior teeth with full facial veneers affords
the dentist significant control of the contours generated.
When treating an isolated tooth, however, the success of
the result is largely determined by how well the restored tooth esthetically matches the surrounding natural teeth. The contralateral tooth to that being restored
should be closely examined for subtle characterizing
features, such as developmental depressions, embrasure
form, prominences, or other distinguishing characteris-

tics of form. A high degree of realism must be reproduced artfully to achieve optimal esthetics when restoring isolated teeth or areas.
Illusions of shape also play a significant role in dental
esthetics. The border outline of an anterior tooth (i.e., facial view) is primarily two-dimensional (i.e., length and
width). However, the third dimension of depth is critical in creating illusions, especially those of apparent
width and length.
Prominent areas of contour on a tooth typically are
highlighted with direct illumination, making them more
noticeable, whereas areas of depression or diminishing
contour are shadowed and less conspicuous. By controlling the areas of light reflection and shadowing, full
facial coverage restorations (in particular) can be esthetically contoured to achieve various desired illusions
of form.
Moreover, the apparent size of a tooth can be changed
by altering the position of facial prominences or heights
of contour without changing the actual dimension of the
tooth. For example, when compared with normal tooth
contours (Fig. 15-3, A) a tooth can be made to appear
narrower by positioning the mesiofacial and distofacial
line angles closer together (see Fig. 15-3, B). Developmental depressions also can be positioned closer together to enhance the illusion of narrowness. In like
manner, greater apparent width can be achieved by positioning the line angles and developmental depressions
further apart (see Fig. 15-3, C).
Although more difficult, the apparent length of teeth
also can be changed by illusion. When compared with
normal tooth contours (Fig. 15-4, A), a tooth can be
made to appear shorter by emphasizing the horizontal
elements, such as gingival perikymata, and by positioning the gingival height of contour further incisally (see
Fig. 15-4, B). Slight modification of the incisal area,
achieved by moving the incisal height of contour further gingivally, also enhances the illusion of a shorter
tooth. The opposite tenets are true for increasing the apparent length of a tooth. The heights of contour are
moved further apart incisogingivally, and vertical elements, such as developmental depressions, are emphasized (see Fig. 15-4, C).
Used in combination these illusionary techniques are
particularly valuable for controlling the apparent di-

C H A P T E R 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

15-3
Creating illusions of width. A, Normal width. B, A
tooth can be made to appear narrower by positioning mesial
and distal line angles closer together and by more closely approximating developmental depressions. C, Greater apparent
width is achieved by positioning line angles and developmental depressions further apart.
FIG .

15-4 Creating illusions of length. A, Normal length. B, A tooth can be made to appear
shorter by emphasizing horizontal elements and by positioning the gingival height of contour
further incisally. C, The illusion of length is achieved by moving the gingival height of contour
gingivally and by emphasizing vertical elements, such as developmental depressions.
FIG

FIG 15-5 Controlling apparent tooth size
when adding proximal dimension. A, Teeth
before treatment. B, By maintaining original
positions of the facial line angles (see areas
of light reflection), increased widths of teeth
after composite augmentations are less
noticeable.

mension of teeth in procedures that result in an actual
increased width of the teeth, such as diastema (i.e.,
spaces) closure (see Correction of Diastemas). By contouring the composite additions in such a way that the
original positions of the line angles are maintained, the
increased widths of the restored teeth are less noticeable
(Fig. 15-5). Furthermore, if full facial coverage restorations are placed in conjunction with a diastema closure,
vertical elements can be enhanced and horizontal features deemphasized to control further the apparent dimension of the teeth.

SYMMETRY AND PROPORTIONALITY
The overall esthetic appearance of a human smile is
largely governed by the symmetry and proportionality
of the teeth that constitute the smile. Asymmetric teeth
or teeth that are out of proportion to the surrounding
teeth disrupt the sense of balance and harmony essential for optimal esthetics. Assuming the teeth are of normal alignment (i.e., rotations or faciolingual positional
defects are not present), dental symmetry can be maintained if the sizes of the contralateral teeth are equivalent. A dental caliper should be used in conjunction with

C H A P T E R 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-6 Diastema closure. A, Teeth before
composite additions. B, Symmetric and
equal contours are achieved in the final
restorations.

B

FIG 15-7 The rule of the golden proportion. A, The exact ratios of proportionality.
B, The anterior teeth of this patient are in
"golden proportion" to one another.

any conservative esthetic dental procedure that will
alter the mesiodistal dimension of the teeth. This recommendation is particularly true for procedures such
as diastema closure or other procedures involving
augmentation of proximal surfaces with composite. By
first measuring and recording the widths of the interdental space and the teeth to be augmented, the appropriate amount of contour to be generated with composite resin addition can be determined (Fig. 15-6). In this
manner, symmetric and equal tooth contours can be
generated (see Correction of Diastemas).
When dealing with restorations involving the midline,
particular attention also must be afforded to incisal and
gingival embrasure form; the mesial contours of both
central incisors must be mirror images of one another to
ensure an optimally symmetric and esthetic result.
In addition to being symmetric, anterior teeth must be
in proper proportion to one another to achieve maximum esthetics. The quality of proportionality is relative
and varies greatly depending on other factors (e.g.,
tooth position, tooth alignment, arch form, configuration of the smile). However, one long-accepted theorem
of the relative proportionality of maxillary anterior
teeth typically visible in a smile involves the concept of
the golden proportion . 3° Originally formulated as one of
Euclid's elements, it has been relied upon through the
ages as a geometric basis for proportionality in the
beauty of art and nature . 4 Based on this formula a smile,
when viewed from the front, is considered to be esthetically pleasing if each tooth in that smile (starting from
the midline) is approximately 60% of the size of the
tooth immediately mesial to it. The exact proportion of

the smaller tooth to the larger tooth is 0.618 (Fig. 15-7,
A). It must be emphasized that these proportions are
based on the apparent sizes of the teeth when viewed
straight on and not the actual sizes of the individual
teeth. In a typical esthetically pleasing smile, the maxillary anterior teeth are generally in golden proportion to
one another (see Fig. 15-7, B). Although this theorem is
not the absolute determinant of dental esthetics, it does
provide a practical and proven guide for establishing
proportionality when restoring anterior teeth.
Currently there is no scientific basis for determining
the proper proportions of individual anterior teeth.
However, an accepted theorem for achieving esthetically pleasing central incisors maintains that the ideal
width-to-length ratio should be 0.75:0.8. 7 This ratio represents the ideal proportions needed to optimize the esthetic result. Because the central incisors are the dominant focal point in dental composition, the dentist must
avoid narrow, elongated, or short-and-wide contours.
POSITION AND ALIGNMENT
The overall harmony and balance of a smile depend
largely on proper position of teeth and their alignment
in the arch. Malposed or rotated teeth disrupt the arch
form and may interfere with the apparent relative proportions of the teeth. Orthodontic treatment of such defects should always be considered, especially if other
positional or malocclusion problems exist in the mouth.
However, if orthodontic treatment is either impractical
or unaffordable, minor positional defects often can be
treated with composite augmentation or full facial veneers indirectly made from composite or porcelain. It

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

B

C

FIG 15-8 Position and alignment. A, A minor rotation is first treated by reducing enamel in the
area of prominence. B, The deficient area is restored to proper contour with composite. C, Maxillary lateral incisor is in slight linguoversion. D, Restorative augmentation of facial surface corrects malposition.

must be emphasized that only those problems that can
be conservatively treated without significant alteration
of the occlusion or gingival contours of the teeth should
be treated in this manner.
Minor rotations can be corrected by reducing the
enamel in the area of prominence and augmenting the
deficient area with composite material (Fig. 15-8, A and
B). Care must be taken to restrict all recontouring of
prominent areas to enamel. If the rotation is to be
treated with an indirectly fabricated composite or
porcelain veneer, an intraenamel preparation is recommended with greater reduction provided in the area of
prominence. This allows subsequent restoration to appropriate physiologic contours.
Malposed teeth are treated in a similar manner. Teeth in
mild linguoversion can be treated by augmentation
with full facial veneers either placed directly with composite or made indirectly from processed composite or
porcelain (see Fig. 15-8, C and D). Care must be exercised to maintain physiologic gingival contours that do
not impinge on tissue or result in an emergence profile
of the restoration that is detrimental to gingival health.
Furthermore, a functional incisal edge should be maintained by appropriate contouring of the restoration (an
excessively wide incisal edge should be avoided). If the
occlusion allows, limited reduction of enamel on the lingual aspect can be accomplished to reduce the faciolingual dimension of the incisal portion of the tooth. However, lingual areas participating in protrusive functional
contact should not be altered. It should be pointed out
that individual teeth that are significantly displaced facially (i.e., facioversion) are best treated orthodontically.
SURFACE TEXTURE

The character and individuality of teeth are largely determined by the surface texture and characteristics that
exist. Realistic restorations closely mimic the subtle areas of stippling, concavity, and convexity that are typically present on natural teeth. Young teeth characteristically exhibit significant surface characterization, whereas
teeth in older individuals tend to possess a smoother

surface texture caused by abrasional wear. However,
even in older patients, restorations that are devoid of
surface characterizations are rarely indicated.
The surfaces of natural teeth typically break up light
and reflect it in many directions. Consequently, anatomic features (e.g., developmental depressions, prominences, facets, gingival perikymata) should be closely
examined and reproduced to the extent that they are
present on surrounding surfaces. The restored areas of
teeth should reflect light in a similar manner to unrestored adjacent surfaces. In addition, as alluded to earlier, by controlling areas of light reflection and shadowing
various desired illusions also can be created.
COLOR

Color is undoubtedly the most complex and least understood artistic element. It is an area in which numerous
interdependent factors exist, all of which contribute to
the final esthetic outcome of the restoration. Therefore,
although complex, a basic knowledge of color is imperative to producing consistently esthetic restorations.
Dentists must understand the coloration of natural
teeth to accurately and consistently select appropriate
shades of restorative materials. Teeth are typically composed of a multitude of colors. A gradation of color usually occurs from gingival to incisal, with the gingival region being typically darker because of thinner enamel.
The use of several different shades of restorative material may be required to esthetically restore a tooth. Exposed root surfaces are particularly darker (i.e., dentin
colored) because of the absence of overlying enamel.
Furthermore, in most individuals, canines are slightly
darker in coloration than are the incisors.
Young patients with thick enamel characteristically
exhibit lighter teeth. Moreover, patients with darker
complexions usually will appear to have lighter teeth
because of the contrast that exists between the teeth
and surrounding facial structures. In fact, female patients can enhance the apparent lightness of their teeth
simply by using a darker shade of makeup or lipstick.
By increasing the contrast between the teeth and the

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-9 Translucency and light penetration. A, Light normally penetrates deeply through the
enamel and into dentin before being reflected outward. This affords lifelike esthetic vitality. B, Light
penetration is limited by opaquing resin media under veneers. Esthetic vitality is compromised.

surrounding facial tissues, the illusion of lighter teeth
can be created.
Color changes associated with aging also occur, primarily owing to wear. As the facial enamel is worn
away, the underlying dentin becomes more apparent,
resulting in a darker tooth. Incisal edges are often
darker because of thinning of the enamel or exposure of
the dentin because of normal attrition. Cervical areas
also tend to darken because of abrasion.
An understanding of normal tooth coloration enhances the dentist's ability to create a restoration that
appears natural. However, several clinical factors also
must be considered to enhance the color-matching quality of the restoration. It should be recognized that many
shade guides for composite materials are inaccurate.
Not only are they often composed of a material dissimilar to that of the composite, they do not take into consideration color changes that occur from batch to batch
or changes caused by aging of the composite. Accurate
shade selection is best attained by applying and curing a
small amount of the composite restorative material in
the area of the tooth anticipated for restoration. Shade
selection also should be determined before isolating the
teeth to avoid color variations that can occur as a result
of drying and dehydration of the teeth.
Problems in color perception also complicate selection
of the appropriate shade of restorative material. Various
light sources produce different perceptions of color. This
phenomenon is referred to as metamerism. 41 Even the
color of the surrounding environment influences what is
seen in the mouth. Color perception also is influenced by
the physiologic limitations of the eye. For example, upon
extended viewing of a particular tooth site, the eyes experience color fatigue, resulting in a loss of sensitivity to
yellow-orange shades. By looking away at a blue object

or background (i.e., the complementary color), the eyes
quickly recover and are once again able to distinguish
subtle variations in yellow-orange hues. Because of the
many indirect factors that influence color perception, it is
recommended that the dentist, assistant, and especially
the patient all be involved in shade selection.

TRANSLUCENCY
Translucency also affects the esthetic quality of the
restoration. The degree of translucency is related to how deeply
light penetrates into the tooth or restoration before it is reflected
outward. Normally light penetrates through the enamel

into dentin before being reflected outward (Fig. 15-9, A).
This affords the lifelike esthetic vitality characteristic of
normal, unrestored teeth. Shallow penetration of light
often results in a loss of esthetic vitality. This phenomenon
is a common problem encountered when treating severely
intrinsically stained teeth, such as those affected by tetracycline, with direct or indirect veneers. Although opaque
resin media can mask the underlying stain, a loss of esthetic vitality usually results because of reduced light penetration (see Fig. 15-9, B). Indirect veneers of processed
composite or porcelain fabricated to include inherent
opacity also may experience this problem.
Illusions of translucency also can be created to enhance
the realism of a restoration. Color modifiers (also referred to as tints) can be used to achieve apparent
translucency and tone down bright stains or characterize a restoration. A maxillary right central incisor with
intrinsic yellow staining caused by trauma to the tooth
warranted restoration (Fig. 15-10). When bleaching
treatments were unsuccessful, a direct composite veneer
was used. After an intraenamel preparation and acidetching, a blue color modifier (the complementary color
of yellow) was applied to the prepared facial surface to

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG. 15-10 Use of internally placed color
modifiers. A, Maxillary right central incisor
exhibits bright intrinsic yellow staining as a
result of calcific metamorphosis. B, Color
modifiers under direct-composite veneer reduce brightness and intensity of stain and
si mulate vertical areas of translucency.

reduce the brightness and intensity of the underlying
yellow tooth. Additionally, a gray and violet mixture
of color modifiers was used to simulate vertical areas
of translucency. (The final restoration is shown in
Fig. 15-10, B.) Color modifiers also can be incorporated
in the restoration to simulate maverick colors, check lines,
or surface spots for further characterization.
CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Although an understanding of basic artistic elements is
imperative to esthetic restorations, certain clinical considerations must be addressed concomitantly to ensure
the overall quality of the restoration. In addition to being esthetic, restorations also must be functional. As Dr.
Peter Dawson states, "Esthetics and function go hand in
hand. The better the esthetics, the better the function is
likely to be and vice versa.""
The occlusion must always be assessed before any conservative esthetic procedure. Anterior guidance, in particular,
must be maintained and occlusal harmony ensured
when treating areas involved in occlusion.
Another requirement of all conservative esthetic
restorations is that they possess physiologic contours that
promote good gingival health. Particular care must be
taken in all treatments to finish gingival areas of the
restoration adequately and to remove any gingival excess of material. Emergence angles of the restorations
must be physiologic and not impinge on gingival tissues.
CONSERVATIVE ALTERATIONS
OF TOOTH CONTOURS
AND CONTACTS
Many unsightly tooth contours and diastemas can be
corrected or greatly improved by several conservative
methods. Often these procedures can be incorporated
into routine restorative treatment. The objective is to improve esthetics, yet preserve as much healthy tooth
structure as possible, consistent with acceptable occlusion and health of the surrounding tissue. These procedures include reshaping natural teeth, correcting embrasures, and closing diastemas.
ALTERATIONS OF SHAPE OF NATURAL TEETH
Some esthetic problems can be corrected very conservatively without the need for tooth preparation and
restoration. Consideration always should be given to re-

shaping and polishing the natural teeth to improve their
appearance and function (Fig. 15-11). In addition, the
rounding of sharp angles also can be considered a prophylactic measure to reduce stress and to help prevent
chipping and fractures of the incisal edges.
Etiology. Attrition of the incisal edges often results in
closed incisal embrasures and very angular incisal
edges (see Fig. 15-11, A). Anterior teeth, especially maxillary central incisors, often are fractured in accidents.
Other esthetic problems that often can be corrected or
improved by reshaping the natural teeth include attrition and abnormal wear from habits (e.g., biting fingernails,
holding objects with the teeth).
Treatment. Consultation and examination are necessary before any changes are made in the shape of a tooth
or teeth. Photographs, study models, line drawings, and
esthetic imaging devices enable the patient to envision
the potential improvement before any changes are
made.
As noted earlier, cosmetic contouring to achieve
youthful, feminine characteristics often includes rounding
incisal angles, reducing facial line angles, and opening
incisal embrasures. The opposite characteristics are typically considered more masculine features. However, cosmetic reshaping to smooth rough incisal edges and improve symmetry is equally beneficial to both women
and men.
The patient must understand what is involved and
want to have the alteration made. If reshaping is desired, it is helpful to mark the outline of the areas to be
reshaped on the teeth in the mouth with a pencil or
alcohol-marking pen (see Fig. 15-11, B). By marking the
anticipated areas for enamel reshaping, the patient is
provided some indication of what the postoperative result may look like (see Fig. 15-11, C). If available, esthetic imaging using a computer also can be used to illustrate the possible result before treatment.
Because all reshaping is restricted to enamel, anesthesia is not required. A cotton roll is recommended for isolation. Diamond instruments and abrasive discs and
points are used for contouring, finishing, and polishing
(see Fig. 15-11, D and E). Through careful reshaping of
appropriate enamel surfaces, a more esthetic smile
(characterized by youthful, feminine features) is attained. Rounded incisal edges also will be less likely to
chip or fracture (see Fig. 15-11, F).

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG . 15-14 Closing incisal embrasures. A,
Maxillary canines moved to close spaces
l eft by missing lateral incisors. Mesial incisal embrasures are too open. B, Canines
reshaped to appear like lateral incisors.

opened and the incisal angles of the teeth are rounded
(see Fig. 15-13, B).

ALTERATIONS OF EMBRASURES
Etiology. Anterior teeth can have embrasures that are
too open as a result of the shape or position of the teeth
in the arch. For example, when the permanent lateral incisors are congenitally missing, the canines and posterior teeth may drift mesially or the space may be closed
orthodontically. The facial surface and cusp angle of
some canines can be reshaped to appear like lateral incisors. However, in many instances the mesioincisal embrasures remain too open (Fig. 15-14, A).
Treatment. Composite can be added to establish an
esthetic contour and correct the open embrasures. Evaluation of the occlusion before restoration determines if
the addition will be compatible with functional movements. The patient should understand the procedures
involved and want to have the change made. Line
drawings, esthetic imaging, or photographs of similar
examples are often helpful in explaining the procedure
and allaying patient concerns. Another patient aid involves adding ivory-colored wax or composite to the
teeth (unetched) to temporarily fill the embrasure to
simulate the final result.
Preliminary procedures include cleaning the involved
teeth, selecting the shade, and isolating the area. Local
anesthesia is not usually required, because the preparation does not extend subgingivally and involves only
enamel. A coarse, flame-shaped diamond instrument is
used to remove overly convex enamel surfaces (if present) and to roughen the enamel surface area to be augmented with composite material. It may be necessary to
place a wedge and use an abrasive strip to prepare the
proximal surface. The final contour of the restoration
should be envisioned before the preparation is made so
that all areas to be bonded are adequately roughened.
A polyester strip is inserted to protect the adjacent
tooth during acid-etching. After etching, rinsing, and
drying, the contoured strip is positioned. A light-cured
composite material is inserted, and the strip is closed
during polymerization. The incisal embrasures of both
canines are corrected, and both restorations are finished

by routine procedures (see Fig. 15-14, B). The occlusion
should be evaluated to assess centric contacts and functional movements, and any adjustments or corrections
should be made if indicated.

CORRECTION OF DIASTEMAS
Etiology. The presence of diastemas between the anterior teeth is an esthetic problem for some patients
(Fig. 15-15, A through Q). Before treatment, a diagnosis
of the cause is made, including an evaluation of the occlusion. Probably the most frequent site of a diastema is
between the maxillary central incisors. A prominent
labial frenum with nonelastic fibers extending proximally often prevents the normal approximation of
erupting central incisors .'6 Other causative factors include congenitally missing teeth, undersized or malformed teeth, interarch tooth size discrepancies (i.e.,
Bolton discrepancy), supernumerary teeth, and heredity. Diastemas also may result from other problems,
such as tongue thrusting, periodontal disease, or posterior bite collapse. Again, diastemas should not be closed
without first recognizing and treating the underlying cause.

Treating the cause may correct a diastema.
Treatment.
Traditionally diastemas have been
treated by surgical, periodontal, orthodontic, and prosthetic procedures. These types of corrections can be impractical or unaffordable and often do not result in permanent closure of the diastema. In carefully selected
cases, a more practical alternative is use of the acidetched technique and composite augmentation of proxi mal surfaces (see Figs. 15-5 and 15-6). It is emphasized
that all treatment options (including no treatment)
should be considered before resorting immediately to
composite augmentation. Line drawings, photographs,
computer imaging, models with spaces filled, or direct
temporary additions of ivory-colored wax or composite
material on the natural teeth (unetched) are important
preliminary procedures.
The correction of a diastema between the maxillary
central incisors is described and illustrated (see Fig. 1515). After the teeth are cleaned and the shade selected, a
Boley gauge or other suitable caliper is used to measure
the width of the diastema and the individual teeth (see

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG . 15-15 Diastema closure. A, Esthetic problem created by space between central incisors.
B and C, Interdental space and size of central incisors measured with caliper. D, Teeth isolated
with cotton rolls and retraction cord tucked into gingival crevice. E, A diamond instrument is
used to roughen enamel surfaces. F, Etched enamel surface indicated by arrow. G, Composite
i nserted with composite instrument. H, Matrix strip closed with thumb and forefinger. I, Com
Continued
posite addition is cured.

Fig. 15-15, B and C). Occasionally, one central incisor
will be wider, requiring a greater addition to the narrower tooth. Assuming the incisors are of equal width,
symmetric additions can be ensured by using half of the
total measurement of the diastema to gauge the width of
the first tooth restored. Cotton rolls, instead of a rubber
dam, are recommended for isolation because of the importance of relating the contour of the restoration directly to the proximal tissue. Usually the restoration
must begin below the gingival crest to appear natural
and to be confluent with the tooth contours.
With cotton rolls in place, a gingival retraction cord of
an appropriate size is tucked in the gingival crevice of
each tooth from midfacial mesially to midlingual (see
Fig. 15-15, D). The cord retracts the soft tissue and prevents seepage from the crevice. In some instances the retraction cord may need to be inserted for one tooth at a

time to prevent strangulation of the interproximal tissues during preparation and restorative procedures. To
enhance retention of the composite, a coarse, flameshaped diamond instrument is used to roughen the
proximal surfaces, extending from the facial line angle
to the lingual line angle (see Fig. 15-15, E). More extension may be needed to correct facial or lingual contours,
depending on the anatomy and position of the individual tooth. The enamel is acid-etched approximately
0.5 mm past the prepared, roughened surface. The acid
should not be allowed to flow into the gingival crevice.
After rinsing and drying, the etched enamel should display a lightly frosted appearance (see Fig. 15-15, F). A
2 x 2 inch (5 x 5 cm) gauze is draped across the mouth
and tongue to prevent inadvertent contamination of the
etched preparations by the patient. After both preparations are completed, the teeth are restored one at a time.

C H A P T E R 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG . 15-15, cont'd Diastema closure. J, Finishing strip used to finalize contour of first addition.
K, A tight contact is attained by displacing the second tooth being restored in a distal direction
with thumb and forefinger while holding matrix in contact with adjacent restoration. L, Flameshaped finishing bur used to contour restoration. M, Finishing strip used to smooth subgingival
areas. N, Restoration is polished with rubber abrasive point. O, Final luster attained with poli shing paste applied with prophy cup. P, Unwaxed floss used to detect any excess composite. Q,
Diastema closed with symmetric and equal additions of composite.

A polyester strip is contoured and placed proximally,
with the gingival aspect of the strip extending below the
gingival crest. Additional contouring may be required to
produce enough convexity in the strip. (For contouring a
polyester strip see Chapter 12.) In most cases a wedge
cannot be used. The strip is then held (with the index finger) on the lingual aspect of the tooth to be restored,
while the facial end is reflected for access. A light-cured
composite is used for the restoration. After the resinbonding agent is applied, the composite material is inserted with a hand instrument (see Fig. 15-15, G). Careful attention is given to pressing the material lingually to
ensure confluence with the lingual surface. The matrix is
then gently closed facially, beginning with the gingival
aspect (see Fig. 15-15, H). Care must be taken not to pull
the strip too tightly, because the resulting restoration
may be undercontoured faciolingually or mesiodistally

or both. The light-cured composite material is polymerized with the light from both facial and lingual directions for a minimum of 20 seconds from each direction
for a total of 40 seconds (see Fig. 15-15, f). Initially it is
better to overcontour the first restoration slightly to
facilitate finishing it to an ideal contour.
When polymerization is complete, the strip is removed. Contouring and finishing are achieved with appropriate carbide-finishing burs, fine diamonds, or
abrasive discs (see Fig. 15-15, L). Finishing strips are invaluable for finalizing proximal contours (see Fig. 15-15,
J and M). Final polishing is deferred until the contralateral restoration is completed. It is imperative for good
gingival health that the cervical aspect of the composite
addition be immaculately smooth and continuous with
the tooth structure. Overhangs must not be present. Removal of the gingival retraction cord will facilitate in-

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-16 Multiple diastemas occurring among maxillary anterior teeth. A, Before correction.
B, Appearance after diastemas are closed with composite augmentation.

A and B, Diastema closure and cosmetic contouring. Significant esthetic improvement is achieved by replacing defective Class III restorations and closing diastemas with con-

FIG 15-17

servative-composite additions and cosmetically reshaping the teeth.

spection and smoothing of this area. Flossing with a
length of unwaxed floss will verify that the gingival
margin is correct and smooth if no fraying of the floss
occurs (see Fig. 15-15, P). It is important that the correct
mesiodistal dimension of the first tooth be established before
the second tooth is restored.

After etching, rinsing, and drying, the second restoration is completed. A tight proximal contact can be attained by displacing the second tooth being restored in
a distal direction (with thumb and index finger), while
holding the matrix in contact with the adjacent restoration (see Fig. 15-15, K). Contouring is accomplished with
a 12-fluted carbide bur and finishing strips (see Fig. 1515, L and M). Articulating paper should be used to evaluate the patient's occlusion to ensure that the restorations are not offensive in centric or functional
movements; adjustments can be made with a carbide
finishing bur or abrasive discs. Final polishing is
achieved with rubber polishing points or polishing
paste applied with a prophy cup in a low-speed handpiece (see Fig. 15-15, N and O). Again, unwaxed floss is
used to detect any excess material or overhang (see Fig.
15-15, P). The esthetic result is seen in Fig. 15-15, Q.
Multiple diastemas among the maxillary anterior
teeth are shown in Fig. 15-16, A. Closing the spaces by
orthodontic movement was considered; however, be-

cause the teeth were undercontoured mesiodistally, the
spaces were filled by etching the teeth and bonding
composite to the proximal surfaces. The teeth are shown
after treatment (see Fig. 15-16, B). A similar case is illustrated in Fig. 15-5.
When defective Class III restorations or proximal
caries exist, it is recommended that they be restored
with the same composite used for closing the diastema.
Often these restorations can be restored at the same time
the diastema is closed with composite additions (Fig.
15-17).
Occasionally, diastemas are simply too large to esthetically close with composite augmentation alone
(Fig. 15-18, A). Closing a large space of this magnitude
with composite would merely create an alternative esthetic problem, excessively large central incisors, which
would further exacerbate the existing discrepancy in
proportionality among the anterior teeth. In such cases,
large spaces are best redistributed orthodontically
among the anterior teeth so that symmetric and equal
composite additions can be made to both the central
and lateral incisors (see Fig. 15-18, B and C). This approach involving space distribution results in improved
proportionality among the anterior teeth (see Artistic Elements). The final result, right after completion, is shown
in Fig. 15-18, D.

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG . 15-18 Space distribution. A, Midline diastema too large for simple closure with composite
additions. B and C, Space distributed among four incisors with orthodontic treatment. D, Final
result after composite additions.

CONSERVATIVE TREATMENTS
FOR DISCOLORED TEETH

One of the most frequent reasons patients seek dental
care is discolored anterior teeth. Even patients with
teeth of normal color request whitening procedures.
Treatment options include removal of surface stains,
bleaching, microabrasion or macroabrasion, veneering,
and placement of porcelain crowns. Many dentists recommend porcelain crowns as the best solution for badly
discolored teeth. If crowns are properly done with the
highly esthetic ceramic materials currently available,
they have great potential for being esthetic and long
lasting. On the other hand, there are increasing numbers
of patients who do not want their teeth "cut down" for
crowns and are electing an alternative, conservative approach, such as veneers, that preserves as much of the
natural tooth as possible. This treatment is performed
with the understanding that the corrective measures
may be less permanent.
Discolorations are classified as extrinsic or intrinsic.
Extrinsic stains are located on the outer surfaces of the
teeth, whereas intrinsic stains are internal. The etiology
and treatment of extrinsic and intrinsic stains are discussed in the following sections.
EXTRINSIC DISCOLORATIONS
Etiology. Stains on the external surfaces of teeth (referred to as extrinsic discolorations) are quite common
and may be the result of a number of causes. In young
patients, stains of almost any color can be found and are
usually more prominent in the cervical areas of the teeth

(Fig. 15-19, A). These stains may be related to remnants
of Nasmyth's membrane, poor oral hygiene, existing
restorations, gingival bleeding, plaque accumulation,
eating habits, or the presence of chromogenic microorganisms." In older patients, stains on the surfaces of the
teeth are more likely to be brown, black, or gray and occur on areas adjacent to the gingival tissue. Poor oral hygiene is a contributing factor, but coffee, tea, and other
types of chromogenic food or medications can produce
stains (even on plaque-free surfaces). Tobacco stains
also are observed frequently. Existing restorations may
be discolored for the same reasons.
An example of one of the most interesting and unusual types of external staining is illustrated in Fig. 1519, B. In Southeast Asia, some women traditionally dye
their teeth with betel nut juice to match their hair and
eyes as a sign of beauty. Slices of lemon are held in contact with the teeth before applying the betel nut juice to
make the staining process more effective. This example
was probably one of the first applications of the acidetching technique. A weak acid, such as that found in
citrus fruits, is known to cause rapid decalcification of
the enamel.
Treatment. Most surface stains can be removed
by routine prophylactic procedures (Fig. 15-20, A
through C). However, some superficial discolorations
on tooth-colored restorations and decalcified areas on
the teeth cannot be corrected by such cleaning. Conservative correction may be accomplished by mild microabrasion or by surfacing the thin, outer, discolored
layer with a flame-shaped, carbide finishing bur or

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG
15-19 Extrinsic stains. A, Surface stains
on facial surfaces in young patient. B, Exotic
decoration of anterior teeth by etching with
citrus fruit juice and applying black pigment.
(Courtesy of Dr. Jeff Burkes.)

Treatment of surface stains. A, Tobacco stains. B, Pumicing teeth with rubber cup.
C, Shade guide used to confirm normal color of natural teeth.
FIG 15-20

diamond instrument (i.e., macroabrasion), followed by
polishing with abrasive discs or points to obtain an
acceptable result. (See the subsequent sections on
Microabrasion and Macroabrasion for details of clinical
technique.)
I NTRINSIC DISCOLORATIONS
Etiology. Intrinsic discolorations are caused by deeper

internal stains or enamel defects; these stains are more
complicated to treat than external types. Teeth with vital or nonvital pulps and root canal-treated teeth can be
affected. Vital teeth may be discolored at the time the
crowns are forming, and the abnormal condition usually involves several teeth. Causative factors include
hereditary disorders, medications (particularly tetracycline preparations), excess fluoride, high fevers associated with early childhood illnesses, and other types of
trauma. The staining may be located in enamel or in
dentin. Discolorations restricted to dentin may still
show through the enamel. Discoloration also may be
localized or generalized, involving the entire tooth.
Various preparations of the antibiotic drug tetracycline
can cause the most distracting, generalized type of intrinsic discoloration (Fig. 15-21, A). 6 The severity of the staining depends on the dose, duration of exposure to the
drug, and the type of tetracycline analog used. Different
types of tetracycline's induce different types of discoloration, varying from yellow-orange to dark blue-gray.
Dark blue-gray, tetracycline-stained teeth are considerably more difficult to treat than are those with mild yellow-orange discolorations. Staining from tetracyclinetype drugs most frequently occurs at an early age and is

caused by ingestion of the drug concomitant with the development of the permanent teeth. However, studies indicate,that permanent teeth in adults also can experience
a graying discoloration as a result of long-term exposure
to minocycline, a tetracycline analog.6
The presence of excess fluoride in drinking water and
other sources at the time the teeth are forming can result
in another type of intrinsic stain called fluorosis, and it
usually is generalized. Because of the high fluoride content in the enamel, fluorosed teeth may be difficult to
treat with acid-etching and resin-bonding procedures.
Localized areas of discoloration may occur on individual teeth because of enamel or dentin defects induced during tooth development. High fevers and
other forms of trauma can damage the tooth during its
development, resulting in unesthetic hypoplastic defects. Additionally, localized areas of dysmineralization
or the failure of the enamel to properly calcify can result
in hypocalcified white spots. After eruption, poor oral
hygiene also can result in decalcified white spots. Poor
oral hygiene during orthodontic treatment frequently
results in these types of decalcified defects. However,
white or discolored spots with intact enamel surface
(i.e., surface not soft) are often evidence of intraoral
remineralization, and such spots are not indications for
invasive treatment (unless for esthetic concerns). Additionally, caries, metallic restorations, corroded pins, and
leakage or secondary caries around existing restorations
can result in various types of intrinsic discoloration.
As noted earlier, aging effects also can result in yellowed teeth. As patients grow older, the tooth enamel
becomes thinner because of wear and, thus, allows the

CHAPTER 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG
15-21 I ntrinsic stains. A, Staining by
tetracycline drugs. B, Staining of maxillary
l eft central incisor from tooth trauma and
degeneration of the pulp.

FIG. 15-22 Illusion of a lighter appearance
of teeth by use of darker makeup. A, Before.
B, After.

underlying dentin to become more apparent. This results in a yellowing effect, depending on the intrinsic
color of the dentin. Additionally, the permeability of
teeth usually allows the infusion (over time) of significant organic pigments (from chromogenic foods,
drinks, and tobacco products) that produce a yellowing
effect.
Nonvital teeth also can become discolored intrinsically.
These stains usually occur in individual teeth after
eruption has taken place. The pulp may become infected or degenerate as a result of trauma, deep caries,
or irritation from restorative procedures. If these teeth
are properly treated by root canal therapy, they usually
will retain their normal color. If treatment is delayed,
discoloration of the crown is more likely to occur. The
degenerative products from the pulp tissue will stain
the dentin and will be readily apparent because of the
translucency of the enamel (see Fig. 15-21, B). Trauma
resulting in calcific metamorphosis (i.e., calcification of
the pulp chamber, root canal, or both) also can produce
significant yellowing of the tooth. This condition is extremely difficult to treat (see Fig. 15-10).
Treatment. Many persons have definite esthetic
problems from intrinsic stains, whereas others worry
needlessly about the overall color of their teeth. In the
latter instance, the dentist must decide if the color of the
teeth can be improved enough to justify treatment even
though the patient insists on having something done.
For example, persons with light complexions may believe that their teeth are too dark, when actually they are
normal in color (Fig. 15-22, A). Positioning a shade tab
from a shade guide of tooth colors next to such teeth often will demonstrate to the patient that the color of their
teeth is well within the normal range of shades. As
stated, a suntan, darker makeup, or darker lipstick will

usually make teeth appear much whiter by increasing
the contrast between the teeth and the surrounding facial features (see Fig. 15-22, B).
The patient should be told that many discolorations
can be corrected or greatly improved through conservative methods such as bleaching, microabrasion or macroabrasion, or veneering. Mild discolorations are best
left untreated, bleached, or treated conservatively with
microabrasion or macroabrasion, because no restorative
material is as good as the healthy, natural tooth structure.
Moreover, the patient should be informed that the gingival
tissue will never be as healthy when adjacent to restorative
material as when next to normal tooth structure.

Color photographs of previously treated teeth with intrinsic staining (i.e., before and after treatment) are excellent adjuncts to help the patient make an informed decision. Esthetic imaging with modern computer simulation
of the postoperative result also can be an effective educational tool. Patients appreciate knowing what the cause
of the problem is, how it can be corrected, how much
time is involved, and what the cost will be. They also
should be informed of the life expectancy of the various
treatment alternatives suggested. For example, vital
bleaching usually will result in tooth lightening for only
1 to 3 years, whereas an etched porcelain veneer should
last 10 to 15 years or longer. With continuous improvements in materials and techniques, a much longer lifespan may be possible with any of these techniques. The
clinical longevity of esthetic restorations also is enhanced
in patients who exhibit good oral hygiene, proper diet, a
favorable bite relationship, and little or no contact with
agents that cause discoloration or deterioration.
Correction of intrinsic discolorations caused by failing restorations entails replacement of the faulty portion
or the entire restoration. Correction of discolorations

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

caused by carious lesions requires appropriate restorative treatment. Conservative treatment methods are
covered in the chapters on composite, amalgam, and
cast restorations. Esthetic inserts for metal restorations
are described later in this chapter. For the other types of
intrinsic discolorations previously discussed, detailed
treatment options are presented in the following three
sections.

15-23 Radiograph reveali ng the presence of extensive
cervical resorption.
FIG

BLEACHING TREATMENTS
The lightening of the color of a tooth through the application of a chemical agent to oxidize the organic pigmentation in the tooth is referred to as bleaching. In keeping
with the overall conservative philosophy of tooth restoration, consideration first should be given to bleaching
anterior teeth when intrinsic discolorations are encountered. Bleaching techniques may be classified as to
whether they involve vital or nonvital teeth, and whether
the procedure is performed in the office, or with some
outside the office component. Bleaching of nonvital teeth
was first reported in 1848, whereas in-office bleaching of
vital teeth was first reported in 1868. 22 By the early 1900s,
in-office vital bleaching had evolved to include the use of
heat and light for activation of the process. Although
there are reports of a 3% ether and peroxide mouthwash
used for bleaching in 1893, the "dentist prescribed-home
applied" technique (also referred to as nightguard vital
bleaching) for bleaching vital teeth outside the office
began around 1968. 23
Most bleaching techniques use some form or derivative of hydrogen peroxide in different concentrations
and application techniques. The mechanism of action of
bleaching teeth with hydrogen peroxide is considered to
be oxidation of organic pigments, although the chemistry is not well understood. Bleaching generally has an
approximate lifespan of 1 to 3 years, although the
change may be permanent in some situations.
With all bleaching techniques, there is a transitory decrease in the potential bond strength of composite when
it is applied to the bleached, etched enamel. This reduction in bond strength results from residual oxygen or
peroxide residue in the tooth that inhibits the set of the
bonding resin, precluding adequate resin tag formation
in the etched enamel. However, no loss of bond strength is
noted if the composite restorative treatment is delayed at least
1 week after cessation of any bleaching. 44

NONVITAL BLEACHING PROCEDURES
The primary indication for nonvital bleaching is to
lighten teeth that have undergone root canal therapy.
This discoloration may be a result of bleeding into the
dentin from trauma before root canal therapy, degradation of pulp tissue left in the chamber after such therapy,
or staining from restorative materials and cements
placed in the tooth as a part of the root canal treatment.
Most posterior teeth that have received root canal ther-

apy require cast restorations that encompass the tooth to
prevent subsequent fracture. However, anterior teeth
needing restorative treatment and that are largely intact
may be restored with composite rather than with partial
or full coverage restorations without significantly compromising the strength of the tooth .4° This knowledge
has created a resurgence in the use of nonvital bleaching
techniques.
Nonvital bleaching techniques include an in-office
thermocatalytic technique and an out of the office technique referred to as walking bleach. (See the following
sections for details of these two techniques.)
Although nonvital bleaching is quite effective, there is
a slight potential (i.e.,1%) for a most deleterious side effect termed cervical resorption (Fig. 15-23). 2° This sequela
requires prompt and aggressive treatment. In animal
models, cervical resorption has been observed most
when using a thermocatalytic technique with high
heat.33 Therefore the "walking bleach" technique or an
in-office technique that does not require the use of heat
is preferred for nonvital bleaching. To reduce the possibility of resorption, immediately after bleaching, a paste
of calcium hydroxide powder and sterile water is placed
in the pulp chamber as described in the following sections . Also, sodium perborate alone, rather than in
conjunction with hydrogen peroxide, may be used as
the primary bleaching agent. Although sodium perborate may bleach more slowly, it is safer and less offensive to the tooth .27 Periodic radiographs should be made
after bleaching to screen for cervical resorption, which
generally has its onset in 1 to 7 years .29
I n-Office Nonvital Bleaching Technique. The inoffice bleaching for nonvital teeth is historically a thermocatalytic technique involving the placement of 35% hydrogen peroxide liquid into the debrided pulp chamber
and acceleration of the oxidation process by placement
of a heating instrument into the pulp chamber.
A more recent technique uses 35% hydrogen peroxide
pastes or gels that require no heat. This technique is frequently the preferred in-office technique for bleaching
nonvital teeth. In both techniques, it is imperative that a
sealing cement (polycarboxylate or light-cured glass-

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

15-24 I ndication for bleaching root
canal-filled tooth. A, Before. B, After intracoronal. nnnvital hlaachinn
FIG

ionomer cement is recommended) be placed over the
exposed root canal filling before application of the
bleaching agent to prevent leakage and penetration of
the bleaching material in an apical direction.
"Walking" Bleach Technique. Before beginning the
"walking bleach" technique, evaluate the potential for
occlusal contact on the area of the root canal access opening. Place a rubber dam to isolate the discolored tooth
and remove all materials in the coronal portion of the
tooth (i.e., access opening). Remove gutta-percha (to approximately 2 mm apical of the clinical crown) and enlarge the endodontic access opening sufficiently to ensure complete debridement of the pulp chamber. Next,
place a polycarboxylate or a light-cured glass-ionomer
cement liner to seal the gutta-percha of the root canal filling from the coronal portion of the pulp chamber. After
this seal has hardened, trim any excess material from the
seal so that the discolored dentin is exposed peripherally. Using a cement spatula with heavy pressure on a
glass slab, blend one drop of saline with enough sodium
perborate to form a creamy paste. Caution must be exercised in handling the material, because 35% hydrogen
peroxide is a potent oxidizer and will chemically burn
tissue upon contact. Should tissue be inadvertently contacted by the bleaching material, the affected area should
be rinsed with copious amounts of water. To eliminate any
risks associated with the hydrogen peroxide, water or saline
may be mixed with sodium perborate to form the bleaching
paste (although bleaching results are more slowly attained).

Use a spoon excavator or similar instrument to fill the
pulp chamber (with the bleaching mixture) to within
2 mm of the cavosurface margin, avoiding contact with
the enamel cavosurface margins of the access opening.
Use a cotton pellet to blot the mixture and then place a
temporary sealing material (e.g., Intermediate Restorative Material [IRM] or Cavit) to seal the access opening.
The area should remain isolated for approximately
5 minutes after closure to evaluate the adequacy of the
seal of the temporary restoration. If bubbles appear
around the margins of the temporary material indicating leakage, the temporary restoration must be replaced. If no bubbles appear, remove the rubber dam
and check the occlusion to assess the presence or absence of contact on the temporary restoration.
The bleaching mixture is very active for 24 hours,
after which little potential for harm to tissue exists. The

mixture may be changed every 3 to 5 days, and usually
one to three treatments are required to achieve optimal
tooth lightening. If sodium perborate is used alone, it
should be changed weekly. Upon successful bleaching
of the tooth, rinse the chamber and fill it to within 2 mm
of the cavosurface margin with a paste consisting of calcium hydroxide powder in sterile saline. (Keep the
enamel walls and margins clean and free of the calcium
hydroxide paste). Reseal the access opening with a temporary restorative material in a manner previously described and allow the calcium hydroxide material to remain in the pulp chamber for 2 weeks. Afterward,
remove the temporary restorative material, rinse away
the calcium hydroxide, and dry the pulp chamber. Next,
etch the enamel and dentin and restore the tooth with a
light-cured composite (Fig. 15-24).
Occasionally. a tooth that has been bleached by the
"walking bleach" technique and sealed with a composite restoration will subsequently discolor. In this instance the alternative treatment option should be an
attempt to bleach the tooth externally with one of the
external bleaching techniques (see Vital Bleaching
Procedures).

VITAL BLEACHING PROCEDURES
Generally, the indications for the different vital bleaching techniques are similar, with patient preference, cost,
compliance, and difficulty in removing certain discolorations dictating the choice of treatment or combination of treatments. Indications for vital bleaching include intrinsically discolored teeth from aging, trauma,
or drug ingestion. Alternative treatment options for a
failed, nonvital, "walking bleach" procedures are the
external vital bleaching techniques. Vital bleaching also
is often indicated before and after restorative treatments
to harmonize shades of the restorative materials with
the natural teeth.
Teeth exhibiting yellow or orange intrinsic discoloration appear to respond best to vital bleaching,
whereas teeth exhibiting bluish-gray discolorations often are considerably more difficult to treat in this manner. Other indications for external bleaching include single teeth that have darkened from trauma but are still
vital or have a poor endodontic prognosis because of
the absence of a radiographically visible canal (i.e., calcific metamorphosis). Brown fluorosis stains also are of-

CHAPTER 1 5

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

ten responsive to treatment, but white fluorosis stains
are not effectively resolved (although they can be made
less obvious if the surrounding tooth structure can be
significantly whitened).
Vital bleaching techniques include an in-office technique referred to as power bleaching ' 2 and an outside-theoffice alternative that is a dentist prescribed-home applied technique (i.e., nightguard vital bleaching) .25
These techniques may be used separately or in combination with one another. (Details are provided in subsequent sections.)
Overall, vital bleaching has proven to be safe and effective when performed by, or under the supervision of,
a dentist. With short-term treatment there does not appear to be any appreciable effect on existing restorative
materials, either in loss of material integrity or in color
change, with one exception: polymethylmethacrylate
(PMMA) restorations experience a yellow-orange discoloration upon exposure to carbamide peroxide. For this
reason, temporary crowns should be made from Bisacryl materials rather than PMMA crown and bridge
resin if exposure to carbamide peroxide is anticipated.
Because hydrogen peroxide has such a low molecular
weight, it easily passes through the enamel and dentin.
This characteristic is thought to account for the mild
tooth sensitivity occasionally experienced during treatment. However, this effect is transient, and no long-term
harm to the pulp has been noted.
Often the choice for the dentist is whether to use an inoffice bleaching technique or the dentist prescribedhome applied technique. The advantages of the in-office
vital bleaching technique are that (although it uses very
caustic chemicals) it is totally under the dentist's control,
the soft tissue is generally protected from the process,
and it has the potential for bleaching teeth more rapidly.
Disadvantages primarily relate to the cost, the unpredictable outcome, and the unknown duration of the
treatment. The features that warrant concern and caution include the potential for soft-tissue damage to patient and provider, the discomfort of a rubber dam, and
the potential for posttreatment sensitivity. The advantages
of the dentist prescribed-home applied technique (i.e., nightguard vital bleaching) are the use of a lower concentration

of peroxide (generally 10% to 15% carbamide peroxide),
the ease of application, minimal side effects, and lower
cost because of the reduced chair time required for treatment. The disadvantages are the reliance on patient compliance, the longer treatment time, and the (unknown)
potential for soft-tissue changes with excessively extended use.
I n-Office Vital Bleaching Technique. In-office vital
bleaching requires excellent rubber dam technique and
careful patient management. Place Vaseline or cocoa
butter on the patient's lips and gingival tissues before
application of the rubber dam. Isolate the anterior teeth
(and sometimes the first premolars) with a heavy rubber

dam to provide maximum retraction of tissue and an
optimal seal around the teeth. Ensure a good seal of the
dam by either ligation of the dam with waxed dental
tape or the use of a sealing putty or varnish. Etching of
the teeth with 37% phosphoric acid, previously considered a required part of this technique, now is considered
unnecessary." Place a 35% hydrogen peroxide-soaked
gauze or a gel or paste form of hydrogen peroxide on
the teeth. Instruct the patient to note any sensations of
burning of the lips or gingiva that would indicate a
leaking dam and the need to terminate treatment. The
oxidation reaction of the hydrogen peroxide can be accelerated by applying heat with either a heating instrument (2 minutes per tooth) set at the maximum tolerance of the patient, or with an intense light (30 minutes
per arch). Use of a CO2 laser to heat the bleaching mixture and accelerate the bleaching treatment currently is
not recommended according to a recent report of the
American Dental Association, because of the potential
for hard- or soft-tissue damage.'
Upon completion of the treatment, rinse the teeth, remove the rubber dam, and caution the patient about
postoperative sensitivity. A nonsteroidal, analgesic and
antiinflammatory drug may be administered if sensitivity is anticipated.
Bleaching treatments are generally rendered weekly
for two to six treatments, with each treatment lasting 30
to 45 minutes. Patients may experience transient sensitivity of teeth between appointments, but again, no
long-term adverse pulpal effects have been reported.
Because the enamel is not acid-etched, there is no need
to polish the teeth posttreatment, nor is it essential to
provide a fluoride treatment.
Dentist Prescribed-Home Applied Technique. The
dentist prescribed-home applied technique (i.e., nightguard vital bleaching) is much less labor intensive and
requires substantially less in-office time. An alginate impression of the arch to be treated is made and poured in
cast stone. The impression should be made free of bubbles on or around the teeth by wiping alginate onto the
teeth and adjacent gingival areas before inserting the
impression. After appropriate infection control procedures, rinse the impression vigorously and then pour
with cast stone. Incomplete rinsing of the impression may
cause a softened surface on the stone, which may result in a
nightguard (bleaching tray) that is slightly too small
and irritates tissue. Trim the cast around the periphery
to eliminate the vestibule and thin the base of the cast
palatally (until a hole is produced). Generally, the cast
must be lifted from the table of the cast-trimming machine to remove the vestibule successfully without damaging the teeth. Allow the cast to dry and block out any
significant undercuts using a block-out material (e.g.,
putty, clay, light-activated spacer material).
The nightguard is formed on the cast using a heat
vacuum-forming machine. After the machine has

C H A P T E R 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

warmed up for 10 minutes, a sheet of 0.020 to 0.035 inch
(0.75 to 1.5 mm) soft vinyl nightguard material is inserted and allowed to soften by heat until it sags approximately 1 inch. Close the top portion of the machine
slowly and gently and allow the vacuum. to form the
heat-softened material around the cast. After sufficient
ti me for adaptation of the material, turn off the machine
and allow the material to cool.
Next, use scissors or a No. 11 surgical blade in a BardParker handle to trim in a smooth, straight cut about
3 to 5 mm from the most apical portion of the gingival
crest of the teeth (facially and lingually). This excess material is removed first. Remove the horseshoe-shaped
nightguard from the cast. Trim the facial edges of the
nightguard in a scalloped design, following the outline
of the free gingival crest and using sharp, curved scissors. Scalloping of the lingual surface is optional, because the bleaching material is applied primarily to the
facial aspects of the teeth. Alternatively (on the lingual),
the nightguard may be trimmed apically to within
2 mm of the free gingival crest in a smooth, horseshoeshaped configuration. This scalloped design is preferred
because it allows the tray to cover only the teeth and
prevents entrapment of the bleaching material between
the gingival tissue and the nightguard. The nightguard
is completed and ready for delivery to the patient
(Fig. 15-25).
Insert the nightguard into the patient's mouth and
evaluate it for adaptation, rough edges, or blanching
of tissue. A properly fitting nightguard is shown in
Fig. 15-26. Further shortening (i.e., trimming) may be indicated in problem areas. Evaluate the occlusion on the
nightguard with the patient in maximum intercuspa-

15-25
Vacuum-formed clear-plastic nightguard used for
vital bleaching (i.e., scalloped version).
FIG .

tion. If the patient is unable to obtain a comfortable occlusion because of premature posterior tooth contacts,
trim the nightguard to exclude coverage of the terminal
posterior teeth as needed (to allow optimal tooth contact in maximum intercuspation). In addition, if no lingual scalloping is done, the edges of the guard on the
palate should terminate in grooves or valleys where
possible, rather than on the heights of soft-tissue contours (e.g., in the area of the incisive papilla).
A 10% to 15% carbamide peroxide-bleaching material
generally is recommended for this bleaching technique.
Commercial bleaching products are available as both
clear gels and white pastes. Carbamide peroxide degrades into 3% hydrogen peroxide (active ingredient)
and 7% urea. Bleaching materials containing carbopol
are recommended because it thickens the bleaching solution and extends the oxidation process. Based on numerous research studies, carbamide peroxide bleaching
materials appear to be safe and effective when administered
by or under the supervision of a den tist.z 4

Instruct the patient in the application of the bleaching
gel or paste into the nightguard. A thin bead of material
is extruded into the nightguard along the facial aspects
corresponding to the area of each tooth to be bleached.
Usually only the anterior 6 to 8 teeth are bleached. The
clinician should review proper insertion of the nightguard with the patient. After inserting the nightguard,
excess material is wiped from the soft tissue along the
edge with a soft-bristled toothbrush. No excess material
should be allowed to remain on the soft tissue because
of the potential for gingival irritation. The patient
should be informed not to drink liquids or rinse during
treatment, and to remove the nightguard for meals and
oral hygiene.
Although no one treatment regimen is best for all patients; most patients prefer an overnight treatment approach. If the nightguard is worn at night, a single
application of bleaching material at bedtime is indicated. In the morning, the patient should remove the
nightguard, clean it under running water with a toothbrush, and store it in the container provided. Total treatment time using an overnight approach is usually 1 to
2 weeks. If patients cannot tolerate overnight bleaching,
the bleaching time and frequency can be adjusted to accommodate the patient's comfort level. In addition, in

15-26 Nightguard for vital bleaching.
A and B, Clear-plastic nightguard properly
seated and positioned in the mouth (scall oped on facial, unscalloped on lingual).
FIG

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

15-27
Nightguard vital bleaching.
A, Before bleaching treatment. B, After.
FIG

15-28
Bleaching tetracycline-stained
teeth. A, Before nonvital bleaching. B, After.
(Courtesy of Dr. Wayne Mohorn.)
FIG .

these cases, tolerance to the nightguard and bleaching
material generally are improved if the patient gradually
increases wearing time each day.
If either of the two primary side effects occurs (i.e.,
sensitive teeth or irritated gingiva) the patient should
reduce or discontinue treatment immediately and contact the dentist so that the cause of the problem can be
determined.
It is recommended that only one arch be bleached at a
time, beginning with the maxillary arch. Bleaching the
maxillary arch first allows the untreated mandibular
arch to serve as a constant standard for comparison.
Moreover, restricting the bleaching to one arch at a time
reduces the potential for occlusal problems that could
potentially occur if the thickness of two mouth guards
were interposed simultaneously. Fig. 15-27 illustrates a
typical case before and after treatment with nightguard
vital bleaching.
Tetracycline-stained teeth typically are much more resistant to bleaching. Therefore teeth stained with tetracycline require prolonged treatment times up to several
months before any results are observed. Often, tetracycline-stained teeth are unresponsive to the procedure,
especially if the stains are blue-gray in color. Tetracycline-stained teeth may approach but never seem to
achieve the appearance of normal teeth. A single tetracycline-stained tooth with previous endodontic therapy
or a different pulp size may respond differently from
other teeth in the arch to the bleaching technique.
Because bleaching tetracycline-stained teeth is difficult, some clinicians advocate intentional endodontic
therapy, with the use of an intracoronal nonvital bleaching technique to overcome this problem (Fig. 15-28). Although the esthetic result appears much better than that
obtained from external bleaching, this approach in-

volves all the inherent risks otherwise associated with
root canal treatment. External bleaching techniques offer a safer alternative, even though they may not be as
rapid or effective. Veneers or full crowns are alternative
esthetic treatment methods for difficult tetracyclinestained teeth but involve irreversible restorative techniques (see Indirect Veneer Techniques).
No one bleaching technique is effective in every situation, and all successes are not equal. Often with vital
bleaching, a combination of the in-office technique and
the dentist prescribed home-applied technique will
have better results than either technique used alone.

MICROABRASION
AND MACROABRASION
Microabrasion and macroabrasion represent conservative alternatives for the reduction or elimination of superficial discolorations. As the terms imply, the stained
areas or defects are abraded away. These techniques do
result in the physical removal of tooth structure and,
therefore, are indicated only for stains or enamel defects
that do not extend beyond a few tenths of a millimeter in
depth. If the defect or discoloration remains after treatment with microabrasion or macroabrasion, a restorative alternative is indicated.

MICROABRASION
In 1984 McCloskey reported the use of 18% hydrochloric acid swabbed on teeth for the removal of superficial
fluorosis stains.35 Subsequently, in 1986, Croll modified
the technique to include the use of pumice with the hydrochloric acid to form a paste applied with a tongue
blade. This technique is called microabrasion and involves the surface dissolution of the enamel by the acid
along with the abrasiveness of the pumice to remove su-

CHAPTER 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

perficial stains or defects. Since that time, Croll further
modified the technique, reducing the concentration of
the acid to approximately 11% and increasing the abrasiveness of the paste using silicon carbide particles (in a
water-soluble gel paste) instead of pumice. 9 This product, marketed as Prema compound (Premier Dental
Products Co., Box 111, Norristown, PA 19404), represents an improved and safer means for the removal of
superficial stains or defects. It should be emphasized
that this technique involves the physical removal of
tooth structure and does not remove stains or defects
through any bleaching phenomena.
Before treatment the clinician should evaluate the nature and extent of the enamel defect or stain and differentiate between the nonhereditary developmental dysmineralization (i.e., abnormal mineralization) defects
(e.g., white or light brown fluoretic enamel, and the idiopathic white or light-brown spot) versus the incipient
carious lesion (see Examination of Teeth and Restorations in Chapter 9, Nomenclature in Chapter 6, and
Histopathology of Caries in Chapter 3).
Incipient carious lesions are usually located near the
gingival margin. These lesions have a smooth surface
(i.e., macroappearance), and they appear opaque or
chalky white when dried but are less visible when
hydrated.
Incipient caries is reversible if treated immediately.
Changing the oral environment by oral hygiene and dietary adjustments will allow remineralization to occur. If,
however, the carious lesion has progressed to have a
slightly roughened surface, microabrasion coupled with
a remineralization program is an initial option. If unsuccessful this can be followed by a restoration. Cavitation of
the enamel surface is an indication for restorative intervention. As the location of smooth surface enamel caries
nears the cementoenamel junction (CEJ), the enamel is
too thin to permit microabrasion or macroabrasion (see
Macroabrasion) as a treatment option.
The developmental discolored spot (opaque white or
light brown) is the result of an unknown, local traumatic
event during amelogenesis and is, therefore, termed idiopathic. Its surface is intact, smooth, and hard. It is usually located in the incisal (occlusal) half of the enamel,
which contributes to the unsightly appearance. The patient (or patient's parents) must be informed that an
accurate prognosis for microabrasion cannot be given
but that microabrasion will first be applied. If unsuccessful because of the depth of the defect exceeding
0.2 to 0.3 mm, then the tooth will be restored with a
tooth-colored restoration.
Surface discolorations because of fluorosis also can be
removed by microabrasion if the discoloration is within
the 0.2- to 0.3-mm removal depth limit.
Fig. 15-29, A, shows young patient with fluorosis
stains on teeth Nos. 8 and 9. A rubber dam is placed to
isolate the teeth to be treated and to protect the gingival

tissues from the acid in the Prema paste or compound.
Protective glasses should be worn by the patient to
shield the eyes from any splatter. The Prema paste is applied to the defective area of the tooth with a special
rubber cup that has fluted edges (see Fig. 15-29, B and
C). The abrasive compound can be applied with either
the side or the end of the rubber cup. A 10x gear reduction, low-speed handpiece (similar to that used for placing pins) is recommended for application of the Prema
compound to reduce the possibility of removing too
much tooth structure and to prevent spatter. Moderately
firm pressure is used in applying the compound.
For small, localized, idiopathic white or light-brown
areas, a hand application device is also available for
use with the Prema compound (see Fig. 15-29, D). Periodically, the paste is rinsed away to assess defect removal. The facial surface also is viewed with a mirror
from the incisal aspect to determine how much tooth
structure has been removed. Care must be taken not to
remove excessive tooth structure. The procedure is continued until the defect is removed or until it is deemed
imprudent to continue further (see Fig. 15-29, E). The
treated areas are polished with a fluoride-containing
prophy paste to restore surface luster (see Fig. 15-29, F).
Immediately following treatment, a topical fluoride is
applied to the teeth to enhance remineralization (see
Fig. 15-29, G). Results are seen in Fig. 15-29, H.

MACROABRASION
An alternative technique for the removal of localized,
superficial white spots (not subject to conservative, remineralization therapy) and other surface stains or defects
is called macroabrasion. Macroabrasion simply uses a
12-fluted composite finishing bur or a fine grit finishing
diamond in a high-speed handpiece to remove the defect
(Fig. 15-30, A and B). Care must be taken to use light, intermittent pressure and to carefully monitor removal of
tooth structure to avoid irreversible damage to the tooth.
Air-water spray is recommended, not only as a coolant,
but also to maintain the tooth in a hydrated state to facilitate assessment of defect removal. Teeth that possess
white spot defects are particularly susceptible to dehydration resulting in other apparent white spots that are
not normally seen when the tooth is hydrated. Dehydration exaggerates the appearance of white spots and
makes defect removal difficult to assess.
After removal of the defect or upon termination of
any further removal of tooth structure, a 30-fluted
composite-finishing bur is used to remove any facets
or striations created by the previous instruments (see
Fig. 15-30, C). Final polishing is accomplished with an
abrasive rubber point (see Fig. 15-30, D). The results are
seen in Fig. 15-30, E.
Comparable results can be achieved with either microabrasion or macroabrasion. However, advantages
and disadvantages exist with each. Microabrasion has

C H A P T E R 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-29 Microabrasion. A, Young patient with unesthetic fluorosis stains on central incisors.
B and C, Prema compound applied with special rubber cup with fluted edges. Protective glasses
and rubber dam are needed for safety of patient. D, Hand applicator for applying Prema compound. E, Stain removed from left central incisor after microabrasion. F, Treated enamel surfaces polished with prophylactic paste. G, Topical fluoride applied to treated enamel surfaces.
H, Final esthetic result. (Courtesy of Dr. Ted CrolQ

FIG . 15-30 Macroabrasion. A, Outer surface of mandibular first molar is anesthetic because of superficial enamel
defects. B through D, Removal of discoloration by recontouring and polishing
procedures. E, Completed treatment.

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-31 Clinical examples of indications for treatment with veneers include teeth affected
by: A, tetracycline drug staining; B, fluorosis or enamel hypoplasia; and C, acid-induced erosion
( e.g., lemon-sucking habit).
the advantage of ensuring better control of the removal
of tooth structure. High-speed instrumentation as used
in macroabrasion is technique sensitive and can have
catastrophic results if the clinician fails to use extreme
caution. However, macroabrasion is considerably faster
and does not require the use of a rubber dam or special
instrumentation. Defect removal is also easier with
macroabrasion compared with microabrasion if an airwater spray is used during treatment to maintain hydration of the teeth. Nonetheless, microabrasion is recommended over macroabrasion for the treatment of
superficial defects in children because of better operator
control and superior patient acceptance.
To accelerate the process a combination of macroabrasion and microabrasion also may be considered. Gross
removal of the defect is accomplished with macroabrasion, followed by final treatment with microabrasion.

gingival health. An example of poorly contoured veneers is seen in Fig. 15-31, C; severe gingival irritation
exists around the overcontoured veneers.
Full veneers can be accomplished by a direct or an indirect technique. When a small number of teeth are involved or when the entire facial surface is not faulty (i.e.,
partial veneers), directly applied composite veneers can
be completed for the patient in one appointment
with chairside composite. Placing direct-composite full
veneers is very time consuming and labor intensive.
However, for cases involving young children, a single
discolored tooth, or when economics or patient time are
limited, precluding a laboratory-fabricated veneer, the
direct technique is a viable option.
Indirect veneers require two appointments but typically offer three advantages over directly placed full
veneers:

VENEERS

1. Indirectly fabricated veneers are much less sensitive
to operator technique. Considerable artistic expertise
and attention to detail are required to achieve esthetic and physiologically sound direct veneers consistently. Indirect veneers are made by a laboratory
technician and are typically more esthetic.
2. If multiple teeth are to be veneered, indirect veneers
usually can be placed much more expeditiously.
3. Indirect veneers typically will last much longer than
direct veneers, especially if they are made of porcelain or pressed ceramic.

A veneer is a layer of tooth-colored material that is applied to a tooth to restore localized or generalized defects and intrinsic discolorations (see Figs. 15-33, 15-34,
15-37, and 15-41). Typically, veneers are made of chairside composite, processed composite, porcelain, or
pressed ceramic materials. Common indications for veneers include teeth with facial surfaces that are malformed, discolored, abraded, eroded, or have faulty
restorations (Fig. 15-31).
Two types of esthetic veneers exist: (1) partial veneers
and (2) full veneers (see Fig. 15-31). Partial veneers are indicated for the restoration of localized defects or areas
of intrinsic discoloration (see Figs. 15-1 and 15-31, A and
B). Full veneers are indicated for the restoration of generalized defects or areas of intrinsic staining involving
the majority of the facial surface of the tooth (see Figs.
15-34, 15-35, 15-37, 15-38, and 15-41). However, several
i mportant factors, including patient age, occlusion, tissue health, position and alignment of the teeth, and oral
hygiene, must be evaluated before pursuing full veneers
as a treatment option. Furthermore, if full veneers are
done, care must be taken to provide proper physiologic
contours, particularly in the gingival area, to favor good

Some controversy exists regarding the extent of tooth
preparation that is necessary and the amount of coverage for veneers (Fig. 15-32). Some operators prefer to
etch the existing enamel and apply the veneer to the entire existing facial surface without any tooth preparation.
The perceived advantage of this method is that, in the
event of failure or if the patient does not like the veneer,
it can be removed (thus being reversible). However, several significant problems exist with this approach. First,
to achieve an esthetic result, the facial surface of such a
restoration must be overcontoured, thus appearing and
feeling unnatural. An overcontoured veneer frequently

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

15-32
Three types of veneers. A, Facial view of
partial veneer that does not extend subgingivally or involve incisal angle. B, Full veneer with window preparation design that extends to gingival crest and terminates at the facioincisal angle. C, Full veneer with
i ncisal-lapping preparation design extending subgingivally that includes all of incisal surface. (Note that subgingival extension is only indicated for preparation of
darkly stained teeth and is not considered routine.)
D to F, Cross-sections of the three types of veneers in A
through C.

FIG

results in gingival irritation with accompanying hyperemia and bleeding caused by bulbous and impinging
gingival contours. Second, the veneer is more likely to be
dislodged when no tooth structure is removed before the
etching and bonding procedures are done. If the veneer
is lost, it can be replaced. However, the patient may live
in constant fear that it will happen again, possibly creating an embarrassing situation.
The reversibility of these veneers may seem desirable
and appealing to patients from a psychologic standpoint; however, few patients who elect to have veneers
wish to return to the original condition. In addition, removing full veneers with no damage to the underlying
unprepared tooth is exceedingly difficult, if not impossible. To achieve esthetic and physiologically sound results consistently, an intraenamel preparation is usually indicated. The only exception is in cases where the facial
aspect of the tooth is significantly undercontoured because of severe abrasion or erosion. In these cases, mere
roughening of the involved enamel and defining of the
peripheral margins are indicated.
Intraenamel preparation (or the roughening of the
surface in undercontoured areas) before placing a veneer is strongly recommended for the following reasons:
1. To provide space for opaque, bonding, or veneering
materials for maximal esthetics without overcontouring
2. To remove the outer, fluoride-rich layer of enamel that
may be more resistant to acid-etching

3. To create a rough surface for improved bonding
4. To establish a definite finish line
Establishing an intraenamel preparation with a definite finish line is of particular importance when placing
indirectly fabricated veneers. Accurate positioning and
seating of an indirectly made veneer are significantly
enhanced if an intraenamel preparation is present.
Another controversy involves the location of the gingival margin of the veneer (see Fig. 15-32). Should it terminate short of the free gingival crest at the level of the
gingival crest or apical of the gingival crest? The answer
depends on the individual situation. If the defect or discoloration does not extend subgingivally, then the margin of
the veneer should not extend subgingivally. The only logical

reason for extending the margin subgingivally is if the
area is carious or defective, warranting restoration, or if
it involves significantly dark discoloration that presents
a difficult esthetic problem. Clinicians should remember
that no restorative material is as good as normal tooth structure, and the gingival tissue is never as healthy when it is in
contact with an artificial material.
Two basic preparation designs exist for full veneers: (1)
a window preparation and (2) an incisal, lapping preparation

(see Fig. 15-32). A window preparation is recommended
for most direct and indirect composite veneers. This intraenamel preparation design preserves the functional
lingual and incisal surfaces of the maxillary anterior
teeth, protecting the veneers from significant occlusal
stress. A window preparation design also is recom-

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG

15-33 Direct partial veneers. A, Patient with overcontoured direct full veneers. B, After removal of old veneer, localized white spots are evident. C, Models illustrate fault (x) and cavity
preparation (y). The chamfered margins are irregular in outline. D, Intraenamel preparations for
partial-veneer restorations. E, Conservative esthetic result of completed partial veneers.

mended for indirectly fabricated porcelain veneers if the
patient exhibits significant occlusal function (as evidenced by wear facets on the lingual and incisal surfaces). This design is particularly useful in preparing
maxillary canines in a patient with canine-guided lateral guidance. By using a window preparation, the functional surfaces are better preserved in enamel (see Fig.
15-43, B and C). This design reduces the potential for accelerated wear of the opposing tooth that could result if
the functional path involved porcelain on the lingual
and incisal surfaces, as with an incisal lapping design.
An incisal lapping preparation is indicated when the
tooth being veneered needs lengthening or when an incisal defect warrants restoration. Additionally, the incisal lapping design is frequently used with porcelain
veneers (see Fig. 15-43, B and C), because it not only facilitates accurate seating of the veneer upon cementation, but it also allows for improved esthetics along the
incisal edge.
The preparation and restoration of a tooth with a veneer should be carried out in a manner that will provide
optimal function, esthetics, retention, physiologic contours, and longevity. All of these objectives should be
accomplished without compromising the strength of the
remaining tooth structure. lf the veneer becomes
chipped, discolored, or worn, it can usually be repaired
or replaced.
Darkly stained teeth, especially those discolored by
tetracycline, are much more difficult to veneer with
full veneers than teeth with generalized defects, but
normal coloration. The difficulty is further compounded when the cervical areas are badly discolored

(see Fig. 15-35, A). Usually only the six maxillary anterior teeth require correction, because they are the most
noticeable when a person smiles or talks. However, the
maxillary first premolars (and to a lesser extent, second
premolars) also are included if they, too, are noticeably
apparent upon smiling.
Discolored mandibular anterior teeth are rarely indicated for veneers, because the facioincisal portions are
thin and usually subject to biting forces and attrition.
Therefore veneering lower teeth is discouraged if the
teeth are in normal occlusal contact, because it is exceedingly difficult to achieve adequate reduction of the
enamel to totally compensate for the thickness of the veneering material. Also, if porcelain veneers are placed,
they may accelerate wear of the opposing maxillary
teeth because of the abrasive nature of the porcelain.
Fortunately, in most cases, the lower lip hides these
teeth, and esthetics is not as much of a problem. Most
patients are satisfied with the conservative approach of
veneering only the maxillary anterior teeth.
DIRECT VENEER TECHNIQUES
Direct Partial Veneers. Small localized intrinsic discolorations or defects that are surrounded by healthy
enamel are ideally treated with direct partial veneers
(see Fig. 15-1, B and C). All too often, practitioners place
full veneers when only partial veneers are indicated.
The four anterior teeth in Fig. 15-33, A, illustrate the
clinical technique for placing partial veneers. These defects can be restored in one appointment with a lightcured composite. Preliminary steps include cleaning,
shade selection, and isolation with cotton rolls or rubber

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

Direct full veneers using light-cured composite. A, Enamel hypoplasia of maxillary
anterior teeth. B, Drawing illustrates typical preparation of facial surface for direct full veneer. C,
Preparation is extended onto mesial surface to provide for closure of diastema. D, Direct full veneers restore proximal contact. E, Etched preparations of central incisors. F, Veneers completed
on maxillary central incisors. G, Treatment completed with placement of full veneers on remaining maxillary anterior teeth.

FIG . 15-34

dam (see Chapters 10 and 11). Anesthesia is usually not
required unless the defect is very deep, extending into
dentin.
Fig. 15-33, A, shows four anterior teeth that received direct composite veneers with no enamel preparation for
the restoration of developmental white spot lesions and
the white spots that still show through the veneers (see
Fig. 15-33, A). Upon removal of the defective veneers the
localized white spots are evident (see Fig. 15-33, B). Models illustrating proper preparation are seen in Fig. 1533, C. The outline form is dictated solely by the extent of
the defect and should include all discolored areas. The
clinician should use a coarse, elliptical or round diamond
instrument with air-water coolant to prepare the tooth to
a depth of about 0.5 to 0.75 mm (see Fig. 15-33, D). After
preparation, etching, and restoration of the defective
areas (as described in the following paragraph), the finished partial veneers are seen (see Fig. 15-33, E).
Usually it is not necessary to remove all of the discolored enamel in a pulpal direction. However, the preparation must be extended peripherally to sound, unaffected enamel. Use of an opaquing agent for masking
dark stains is described later in the chapter. However, in
this example no opaque is needed because the remaining stain is light and can be adequately hidden by the
use of an appropriate composite restorative material. If
the entire defect or stain is removed, then a microfilled
composite is recommended for restoring the preparation. If, however, a residual lightly stained area or white

spot remains in enamel, an intrinsically less translucent
composite can be used rather than extending the preparation into dentin to eliminate the defect. Most composites filled primarily with radiopaque fillers (e.g., barium
glass), are more optically opaque with intrinsic masking
qualities (in addition to being radiopaque). Use of these
types of composites for the restoration of preparations
with light, residual stains is most effective and conserves tooth structure.
Chapter 12 describes procedures used to insert and
finish the composite restorations (see Fig. 15-33, E). In
this example, all restorations are of a light-cured microfill composite.
Direct Full Veneers. Extensive enamel hypoplasia involving all of the maxillary anterior teeth was treated by
direct full veneers (Fig. 15-34, A). A diastema also exists
between the central incisors. The patient desired to have
both the hypoplasia and the diastema corrected; examination indicated a good prognosis. A direct technique
was used with a light-cured microfill composite. Although all six teeth can be restored at the same appointment, it may be less traumatic for the patient and the
dentist if the veneers are accomplished in two appointments. In this example, the central incisors were completed during the first appointment and the lateral incisors and canines were completed during a second
appointment.
After the teeth are cleaned and a shade selected, isolate the area with cotton rolls and retraction cords. Pre-

C H A P T E R 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

pare both central incisors with a coarse, rounded end diamond instrument. The window preparation is typically
made to a depth roughly equivalent to half the thickness
of the facial enamel, ranging from approximately 0.5 to
0.75 mm midfacially and tapering down to a depth of
about 0.2 to 0.5 mm along the gingival margin, depending on the thickness of enamel (see Fig. 15-32). A heavy
chamfer at the level of the gingival crest provides a definite preparation margin for subsequent finishing procedures. The margins are not extended subgingivally because these areas are not defective. The preparation for a
direct veneer normally is terminated just facial to the
proximal contact, except in the area of a diastema (see
Fig. 15-34, B). To correct the diastema, the preparations
are extended from the facial onto the mesial surfaces, terminating at the mesiolingual line angles (see Fig. 15-34,
C and D). (See Correction of Diastemas for more complete instructions regarding restoration of this area.) The
incisal edges were not included in the preparations in
this example, because no discoloration was involved. In
addition, preservation of the incisal edges better protects
the veneers from heavy functional forces as noted earlier
for window preparations.
The teeth should be restored one at a time. After etching, rinsing, and drying procedures (see Fig. 15-34, E),
apply and polymerize the resin-bonding agent. Place
the composite on the tooth in increments, especially
along the gingival margin, to reduce the effects of polymerization shrinkage. Place the composite in slight excess to allow some freedom in contouring. It is helpful
to inspect the facial surface from an incisal view with a
mirror to evaluate the contour before polymerization.
After the first veneer is finished, restore the second
tooth in a similar manner (see Fig. 15-34, F). In this case
the remaining four anterior teeth are restored with direct composite veneers (see Fig. 15-34, G) at the second
appointment.
As noted earlier, tetracycline-stained teeth are much
more difficult to veneer, especially if dark banding occurs in the gingival third of the tooth (Fig. 15-35, A). In
this example, time was a factor for the patient so all six
maxillary anterior teeth were veneered in one appointment by using a direct technique. Veneer margins were
placed subgingivally because of the dark discoloration
in this area. This may indicate (along with other possible indications) local anesthesia. Shade selection is more
difficult because all of the anterior teeth are discolored.
The posterior teeth usually have a more normal shade
and can often be used as guides. To obtain a natural appearance, it is helpful to make the cervical third of the
teeth one shade darker than the middle or incisal areas.
Additionally, the canines should be one shade darker
than the premolars and incisors.
After cleaning and shade determination, mark the
gingival tissue level before isolation on the facial
surfaces of the teeth to be veneered by preparing a

shallow groove with a No. 1/4 round, carbide bur (see
Fig. 15-35, B). Because the cervical areas are badly discolored and the gingival tissue covers much of the clinical crown, isolation and tissue retraction is accomplished with a heavy rubber dam and No. 212 cervical
retainer (see Fig. 15-35, C). (For details on application of
the cervical retainer, see Chapters 10, 12, and 18.) Only
one tooth is prepared and restored at a time. The outline
form includes all of the facial surface, extending approximately 0.5 to 1 mm cervical to the mark indicating the gingival tissue level and into the facial embrasures (but not including the contact areas). The incisal
margin includes the facioincisal angle in this instance
because the discoloration involves this area. As much
well-supported enamel as possible should always remain
at the incisal ridge (i.e., surface) to preserve strength,
wear resistance, and functional occlusion on enamel.
Prepare the tooth with a coarse, tapered, rounded end
diamond instrument (see Fig. 15-35, D) by removing approximately one half of the enamel thickness (0.3 mm in
the gingival region to 0.75 mm in the midfacial and incisal regions). Recall that the enamel is thinner in the
cervical area. Some operators prefer to first make depth
cuts to gauge the overall reduction. Although one
preparation and restoration is completed at a time, if all
veneers are to be completed in one appointment the
proximofacial line angles of the adjacent teeth can be reduced along with the tooth being prepared. This procedure makes the operation more efficient and helps prevent damage later to the embrasure area of the restored
tooth as the adjacent area is prepared.
After etching, rinsing, and drying (see Fig. 15-35, E),
apply a thin layer of light-cured, resin-bonding agent to
the etched enamel surface and lightly thin with a brush
to remove any excess. Next, to mask the discolored area,
apply a layer of resin-opaquing agent (see Fig. 15-35, F).
Resin-opaquing agents should be applied in thin layers
(usually two), each layer being cured because of the difficulty in light penetration through the opaque material.
This will ensure complete polymerization of this intermediate layer. Care should be taken not to allow the
opaque material to remain on the cavosurface margin,
because it will appear as a definite opaque line along the
margin of the final restoration. A stippled surface can be
obtained by dabbing the partially cured opaque with
the tip of a brush. This texturing will help reflect light
rays in many directions outward through the veneer
and result in a more natural appearance.
Now apply a gingival shade of composite with a hand
instrument, starting with enough material to cover the
gingival third of the tooth. An explorer tine, which first
is touched to a sparing amount of bonding agent to prevent it from sticking to the composite, is used to adapt
the composite to the margin. Excess composite should
not be allowed to remain beyond the margin. The gingival shade of the composite is feathered out at the

15-35
Direct full veneers using light-cured composite for badly discolored teeth.
A, Tetracycline-stained teeth. B, The level of gingival tissue on facial surface is scribed
by cutting a shallow groove with a No. '/, bur. C, Isolation with rubber dam
and No. 212 cervical retainer. D, Diamond instrument used for making preparation.
E, Etched surface of completed preparation. F, Application of resin opaquing material.
G, Additions of composite completed. H, Curing the composite material. I, Retainer
moved to next tooth and stabilized. J, All veneers completed.

FIG

middle third, smoothed (lightly stroking with a small
disposable brush with fine bristles is helpful in smoothing the surface before curing), and cured.
Next, blend the incisal shade over the middle third
and onto the incisal area to obtain proper contour and
color (see Fig. 15-35, G). If the incisal area itself is very
translucent, special translucent shades of composite are
available from most manufacturers and are recommended for restoration of this area. In this clinical example the staining extended to the incisal edge, thus
precluding significant translucency.
Evaluate the facial contour by inspecting from an incisal view with a mirror before the composite is polymerized (see Fig. 15-35, H). General contouring is done
at this time, but final finishing is delayed until all six veneers are in place.

The No. 212 retainer is moved to the next tooth and
stabilized with compound (see Fig. 15-35, I), and the
steps for a direct veneer are repeated. This procedure is
followed for each tooth until all veneers are placed, finished, and polished (see Fig. 15-35, J).
I NDIRECT VENEER TECHNIQUES
Many dentists find that the preparation, placement, and
finishing of several direct veneers at one time is too difficult, fatiguing, and time-consuming. Some patients become uncomfortable and restless during long appointments. In addition, veneer shades and contours can be
better controlled when made outside of the mouth on a
cast. For these reasons, indirect veneer techniques are
usually preferable. Indirect veneers include those made
of: (1) processed composite, (2) feldspathic porcelain,

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

and (3) cast or pressed ceramic. Because of superior
strength, durability, and esthetics, feldspathic porcelain
is by far the most popular material for indirect veneering techniques used by dentists. Pressed ceramic veneers offer comparable qualities, but require exacting
laboratory technique and a deeper tooth preparation
depth; however, excellent laboratory support and the
superb marginal fit of these veneers can minimize or
eliminate this disadvantage.
Although two appointments are required for indirect
veneers, chair time is saved because much of the work is
done in the laboratory. Excellent results can be obtained
when proper clinical evaluation and careful operating
procedures are followed. Indirect veneers are attached to
the enamel by acid-etching and bonding with either a
light-cured, or dual-cured resin-bonding material.
Processed Composite Veneers. Composite veneers
can be processed in a laboratory to achieve superior
properties. Using intense light, heat, vacuum, pressure,
or a combination of these, cured composites can be produced that possess improved physical and mechanical
properties compared with traditional chairside composites. Additionally, indirectly fabricated composite veneers offer superior shading and characterizing potential and better control of facial contours.
Because their composition is similar to chairside composite, indirect composite veneers are capable of being
bonded to the tooth with a resin-bonding medium. After acid-etching, a bonding agent is applied to the etched
enamel as with any composite restoration. A fluid resinbonding medium then is used to bond the veneer in
place. A chemical bond is formed between the bonding
agent and the bonding medium and, to a lesser extent,
between the bonding medium and the processed composite veneer. Because laboratory processing results in a
greater degree of polymerization, fewer bond sites remain in the processed composite for subsequent bonding to the bonding medium. Excellent mechanical retention occurs at the interface of the bonding medium and
tooth from the roughened tooth surface resulting from
preparation with a coarse diamond instrument and from
tag formation into the etched enamel.
Although significant advantages exist over direct
composite veneers, indirect veneers made of processed
composites possess limited bond strength because of the
reduced potential to form a chemical bond with the
bonding medium (as noted earlier). Consequently it is
necessary to provide additional micromechanical features through surface conditioning (acid-etching) or
sandblasting to enhance retention.
Surface conditioning (i.e., acid-etching) with hydrofluoric acid of veneers made from a hybrid type of composite filled with barium glass and colloidal silica offers
a significant improvement in bond strength . 43 Because
this type of composite contains particles of barium
glass, a relatively soft radiopaque filler, it can be sand-

FIG

15-36 Scanning electron micrograph (x5000) of sandblasted hybrid composite etched with mild concentration of
hydrofluoric acid. (Courtesy of Dr. James Hamilton.)
blasted and etched in the laboratory with a mild concentration (i.e., 9% to 10%) of hydrofluoric acid to produce numerous areas of microscopic undercuts, similar
to the phenomenon that occurs when enamel is etched
(Fig. 15-36). By producing a surface capable of micromechanical bonding, "etched composite" veneers of this
type can be strongly bonded to enamel without relying
on significant chemical bonding. Most other types of
processed composite veneers available today achieve
enhanced bond strength from surface treatment with
sandblasting alone.
Processed composite veneers are easily placed, finished, and polished. They also can be replaced or repaired easily with chairside composite (see Repairs of
Veneers). For these reasons, indirect processed composite veneers are often recommended for placement in children and adolescents as interim restorations until the
teeth have fully erupted and achieved their complete
clinical crown length. At that time (i.e., 18 to 20 years of
age), a more permanent alternative (e.g., porcelain or
pressed ceramic veneers) can be pursued.
Indirect processed composite veneers also are indicated for placement in patients who exhibit significant
wear of their anterior teeth caused by occlusal stress. Because of their somewhat lower cost, indirect processed
composite veneers also offer an esthetic, affordable alternative to more costly porcelain or pressed ceramic
types (when economics is the primary consideration).
However, the patient must be told that processed composite veneers typically do not exhibit comparable clinical longevity.
The patient in Fig. 15-37, A, has six defective direct
composite veneers that will be replaced with indirect
processed composite veneers. Following shade selection, the teeth are isolated with bilaterally placed cotton
rolls and gingival retraction cord . All existing defective
Class III restorations or small carious lesions should be
restored before preparation. Multiple large existing
restorations compromise the potential to bond the veneer to
the tooth and may represent a contraindication. Usually no

CHAPTER 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-37 Indirect processed composite veneers. A, Patient with six defective direct-composi te veneers. B, Finished window preparations for indirect-processed composite veneers. C, Left
central incisor isolated, etched, and ready for veneer bonding. D, Veneer is positioned and
seated with blunt instrument or finger. E, Veneer-bonding medium is light-cured. F, Completed
i ndirect-composite veneers.
anesthetic is required for intraenamel tooth preparations for veneers. In fact, the patient's response is important in judging preparation depth, especially in the
gingival third of the tooth. If possible, the preparations
should be restricted entirely to enamel.
A window preparation design (see Fig. 15-32, E) is
recommended for most indirect processed composite
veneers because of the limited bond strength of the
composite veneer. An "incisal-lapping" design is used if
the teeth require lengthening or if defects exist warranting involvement of the incisal edge (see Fig. 15-32, F).
The window preparation is made with a tapered,
rounded end diamond instrument to a depth of approximately 0.5 to 0.75 mm midfacially, diminishing to a
depth of 0.3 to 0.5 mm along the gingival margin, depending on enamel thickness. As noted earlier for direct
composite veneers, the gingival margin should be positioned just at or slightly above the level of the gingival
crest unless defects, caries, or dark discoloration warrant subgingival extension. Also, the interproximal margins should extend into the facial and gingival embrasures, without engaging an undercut, yet should be
located just facial to the proximal contacts. The finished
preparations are seen in Fig. 15-37, B.
Generally no temporary restorations are placed because the preparations are restricted to enamel. If a
small amount of dentin is inadvertently exposed, a thin
coat of a dentin-bonding agent or dentin desensitizer
can be applied to the exposed dentin and cured to reduce the possibility of postoperative sensitivity. Patients
always should be forewarned that the prepared teeth

will be slightly rough until the final veneer restorations
are bonded.
An elastomeric impression is made of the preparations. If the gingival margins are well isolated and
spaced from the retraction cord, the cord may be left in
place during impression making. If, however, the margins are subgingival or close to the gingival tissue, better access for recording the gingival margin is afforded
by cord removal just before injection of the impression
material. It also is recommended that the lingual aspect
of the gingival embrasures be blocked out with soft wax
(see Fig. 15-43, B) if the gingival embrasures are open faciolingually. This step will prevent penetration and interlocking of the impression material through the gingival embrasure, which often results in torn impressions,
especially along critical marginal areas.
A stone working cast is generated from the impression with individually removable dies to facilitate access to interproximal areas. Once the veneers are fabricated and returned, they should be closely inspected for
fracture lines, chips along margins, or other significant
defects that would preclude successful placement. Because the veneers are composed of composite, some intraoral recontouring is possible following bonding.
At the second appointment the teeth to be veneered
are cleaned with a pumice slurry, the shade confirmed,
and the operating site isolated. Frames are available that
comfortably retract the lips for better access, if needed.
Routine isolation is accomplished by the placement of
cotton rolls and insertion of retraction cords. A 2 x 2 inch
cotton gauze is placed across the back of the patient's

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

mouth to protect against aspiration or swallowing of a
veneer if inadvertently dropped (see Fig. 15-37, D).
The fit of each veneer is evaluated on the individual
tooth and adjusted if necessary. All of the veneers
should fit closely to the tooth at the gingival area. The
veneers should be tried in place (both individually and
collectively) to ensure the fit of adjacent seated veneers.
Veneers should be tried in place only on clean, dry teeth
to eliminate any potential for contamination. If accidental contamination occurs, the veneer should be thoroughly cleaned with alcohol or acid etchant, rinsed, and
dried before bonding. On removal, each veneer is
placed tooth side up (i.e., concave side facing upward)
on an adhesive pad or palette. Some processed composites require that a priming agent be applied to the tooth
side of the veneer according to the manufacturer's instructions. These priming agents are typically adhesionpromoting materials that increase the bond strength of
the veneer to the resin-bonding medium. A thin layer of
resin-bonding agent is applied (but not cured) to the
tooth side of the veneer with a microbrush or small
sponge. The veneers are stored under a jar lid or are
placed in a container that is impervious to light to prevent premature curing of the bonding agent.
A light-cured, resin-bonding medium is recommended for bonding the veneer to the tooth. Shade selection of the bonding medium is determined once the
fit of the individual veneers has been evaluated and
confirmed. Shade selection is made by first placing a
uniform layer of a selected shade of bonding medium,
approximately 0.5 mm in thickness, on the tooth side of
a single veneer. Typically, a central incisor veneer is
used to facilitate shade determination of the bonding
medium. The operatory light is turned away during
shade assessment to prevent premature and inadvertent
curing of the veneer to the tooth. The veneer is seated on
a clean, dry, unetched tooth, the excess bonding medium
removed with a brush, and the overall shade of the veneer evaluated. Following try-in, the veneer is quickly
removed and stored under a jar lid or placed in a container that is impervious to light to prevent curing of the
residual-bonding medium. If the shade of the bonding
medium is determined to be appropriate, more of the
same shade of bonding medium is added to the veneer
j ust before bonding. If a different shade is deemed necessary, the existing shade is wiped from the inner aspect
of the veneer with a disposable microbrush and a new
shade of bonding medium is placed in the veneer. In the
meantime, the assistant can remove residual-bonding
medium of the previous shade from the tooth with a
cotton pellet or brush. The veneer loaded with the new
shade of resin-bonding medium is reseated and evaluated as previously described.
Water-soluble, try-in pastes that correspond to the
same shades of bonding medium are also available with
many veneer-bonding kits. These try-in pastes allow

shade assessment without the concern for in advertent
premature curing of the bonding medium, because the
try-in pastes are not capable of setting. After the try-in
process with these try-in pastes, the veneers must be
thoroughly cleaned according to the manufacturer's instructions to ensure that optimal bonding will occur. A
light-cured or dual-cured bonding medium of the same
shade is used for final cementation.
It should be emphasized that the inherent shade of
the veneer, characterization, and internal opaquing
must be accomplished during fabrication of the veneer
itself. Some additional opaque can be incorporated into
the resin-bonding medium at the time of bonding to
achieve greater masking. Also, the overall shade of the
veneer can be slightly modified by the shade of bonding medium selected. However, significant changes in
shading or masking ability cannot be accomplished
chairside.
The retraction cords are evaluated to ensure that they
are adequately tucked into the gingival crevice. A technique for the individual placement of each veneer is recommended. The tooth used for try-in to assess shade of
the bonding medium should be cleaned again with a
slurry of pumice to remove any residual resin or try-in
paste that may preclude proper acid-etching of the
enamel.
Polyester strips are placed in the proximal areas of the
first tooth to be restored. Wooden wedges can be used to
secure the position of the strips, but care must be taken
not to irritate the gingival papilla for risk of inducing
hemorrhage. The acid etchant is artfully applied with a
small microbrush, sponge, or syringe etchant applicator.
Acid should not be allowed to flow onto the retraction
cord or soft tissue. The prepared tooth (see Fig. 15-37, C)
is ready for veneer bonding after acid-etching, rinsing,
and drying. A thin layer of resin-bonding agent is applied to the etched enamel, lightly blown with air, but
not cured until placement of the veneer. Premature curing
of the bonding agent may preclude full seating of the
veneer.
The selected shade of light-cured, resin-bonding
medium is added to the tooth side of the veneer with
enough material to cover the entire treated surface without entrapping air. The veneer is carefully placed on
the appropriate tooth and lightly vibrated into place
with a blunt instrument or light finger pressure (see
Fig. 15-37, D). A microbrush is used to remove excess
bonding medium. Proper seating of the veneer should
be evaluated with a No. 2 explorer. With the veneer
properly positioned and excess bonding medium removed, a visible light-curing unit is used to polymerize
the material with a minimum exposure time of 40 to
60 seconds each from the facial and lingual directions for
a total exposure of 80 to 120 seconds (see Fig. 15-37, E).
Excess of cured bonding resin remaining around the
margins is best removed with a No. 12 surgical blade

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-38 A and B, Defective, discolored,
direct-composite veneers are replaced with
i ndirect composite veneers.

held in a Bard-Parker handle (see Fig. 15-40, F). Each veneer again should be tried in place immediately before
bonding to ensure full seating in the presence of the
already bonded adjacent veneer. New polyester strips
are positioned for each tooth as the other veneers (one at
a time) are placed in a similar manner.
Once the veneers are all bonded, only a minor
amount of finishing is required at the marginal areas.
Removal of the retraction cord at this time allows access
and visibility for finishing gingival margins. This step is
accomplished as previously described for composite
restorations. Unwaxed floss always should be used to
assess the final smoothness of interproximal areas. If incisal areas have been involved, protrusive excursions
should be evaluated to ensure occlusal harmony in the
restored areas. Patients also should be cautioned to
avoid biting hard foods or objects to prevent fracturing
the incisal edge, especially if an incisal-lapping design
was used. The completed veneers (immediately after
placement) are shown in Fig. 15-37, F. Another example
of processed composite veneers is seen in Fig. 15-38.
Etched Porcelain Veneers. The most frequently
used indirect veneer type is the etched porcelain (i.e.,
feldspathic) veneer. Porcelain veneers etched with hydrofluoric acid are capable of achieving high-bond
strengths to the etched enamel via a resin-bonding
mediums (This porcelain etching pattern can be seen
in Fig. 15-39.) In addition to the high-bond strengths,
etched porcelain veneers are highly esthetic, stain resistant, periodontally compatible, and appear to significantly outlast composite veneers. The incidence of cohesive fracture for etched porcelain veneers is much less
than for direct or indirect composite veneers.
A patient has generalized discoloration of the anterior
teeth and facial and incisal hypoplastic defects (Fig.
15-40, A). A midline diastema will be closed when porcelain veneers are placed. The procedures for preparation,
impression, try-in, and cementation are the same as for indirect processed composite veneers, with a few exceptions. (See the previous section on indirect processed composite veneers for details of these basic techniques.)
Following cleaning, shade selection, and isolation of
the teeth, the intraenamel preparations are made with a
tapered, rounded end, diamond instrument. A hemipreparation, as shown on the maxillary left central in-

FIG
15-39 Scanning electron micrograph (x1000) of feldspathic porcelain etched with hydrofluoric acid. (CourtesyofDr.
Steven Bayne.)

cisor (see Fig. 15-40, B) can be used to assess tooth reduction. Unlike with processed composite veneers, an
incisal-lapping preparation design is generally used for
porcelain veneers, especially if incisal defects warrant
inclusion or the teeth need lengthening (see Fig. 15-32,
F). As noted earlier, this preparation design facilitates
seating of the veneer and enables the laboratory technician to produce a more esthetic incisal edge with the
porcelain and resin margin located on the lingual surface. Because of the strength of the porcelain and excellent bond to enamel, incisal fractures are rarely encountered. Because of the presence of a midline diastema, the
preparations on the mesials of both central incisors are
extended to the mesiolingual line angles to allow subsequent restoration of the proximal contacts (see Fig. 1534, C and D).
After the preparations are completed (see Fig. 15-40,
C), an elastomeric impression is made. In most cases no
temporary restorations are required, because the preparations are shallow and involve only the enamel. The
patient should be instructed to avoid biting hard objects, keep the area clean with a soft bristled brush, and
expect the possibility of some mild sensitivity to hot
and cold.

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-40 Indirect etched porcelain veneers. A, Patient with generalized discoloration of the
anterior teeth along with facial and incisal hypoplastic defects. B, A hemipreparation is often
used to assess tooth reduction. C, Completed incisal-lapping veneer preparations. D, A thin
l ayer of bonding medium is placed in the veneer. E, The etched porcelain veneer is carefully positioned and seated on the tooth. F, A No. 12 surgical blade in a Bard-Parker handle is ideal for
removing excess cured bonding medium. G, A fine-diamond instrument is used to finish rough
gingival margins. H, Lingual areas are best finished with an oval-shaped diamond instrument.
I, A final surface luster is imparted through the use of porcelain-polishing paste. J to L, Completed etched porcelain veneers 18 months later.

Once fabricated by the laboratory, the porcelain veneers are returned to the dentist for cementation at the
second appointment. The completed veneers must be
inspected for cracks, overextended margins, and adequate internal etching (as evidenced by a frosted appearance). Marginal areas, in particular, should be inspected for proper etching so that an adequate seal will
occur in these areas. Overextended marginal areas in-

terproximally may preclude full seating of adjacent
veneers. These areas can be trimmed carefully with a
micron-finishing diamond instrument or flexible abra
sive disc. However, unless severe or inaccessible, most minor
overextensions should be trimmed only after bonding the veneer to the tooth because of the risk offracturing the porcelain.

After the prepared teeth are cleaned with a pumice
slurry, rinsed, and dried, isolation is accomplished with

CHAPTER 15 Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG

15-41 A and B, Etched porcelain veneers. Generalized hypocalcification defects
remaining after microabrasion are corrected
with etched porcelain veneers.

a lip retractor (optional), cotton rolls, and retraction
cords. Then the veneers are tried on the teeth to confirm
proper contour and fit, and an appropriate shade of
resin-bonding medium is selected. The only difference
in this procedure for porcelain veneers from the composite veneers is the need to condition the internal surface of each veneer with a silane primer j ust before applying the resin-bonding agent. The silane acts as a
coupling agent, forming a chemical bond between the
porcelain and the resin . 3 It also improves wettability of
the porcelain. The primary source of retention with
porcelain veneers still remains the etched porcelain surface itself. Only a modest increase in bond strength results from silanation of the porcelain; however, it is recommended because it also may reduce marginal
leakage and discoloration.
A technique is presented and recommended for applying the veneers one at a time. Polyester strips are
placed interproximally to prevent inadvertent bonding
to the adjacent tooth, followed by etching, rinsing, and
drying procedures. It is recommended that the two central incisors be etched and their veneers bonded first,
because of their critical importance esthetically. A resinbonding agent is applied to the etched enamel and the
tooth side of the silane-primed porcelain veneer. Next a
thin layer (0.5 mm) of the selected shade of light-cured,
resin-bonding medium is placed on the tooth side of the
veneer, being careful not to entrap air (see Fig. 15-40, D).
The first veneer is placed on the tooth and vibrated
(carefully and lightly) into place with a blunt instrument or light finger pressure (see Fig. 15-40, E). The
margins of the veneer are examined with a No. 2 explorer to verify accurate seating. Next, the excess resinbonding medium is removed with a disposable microbrush, and the margins are once again evaluated before
the veneer is exposed to the curing light. To ensure complete polymerization, the veneer should be cured for a
minimum of 40 to 60 seconds each from facial and lingual directions for a total exposure time of 80 to 120 seconds. After positioning and bonding of the first veneer,
the second veneer is positioned carefully and bonded in
like manner, followed individually by the remaining
veneers.
A No. 12 surgical blade in a Bard-Parker handle is
ideal for removing excess cured resin-bonding medium

remaining around the margins (see Fig. 15-40, F). Removal of the retraction cord at this time facilitates access
and visibility to subgingival areas. If the marginal fit of
the porcelain veneers is deemed acceptable and a favorable emergence angle exists, the marginal areas need
only minimal finishing. This process is best accomplished with a bullet-shaped, 30-fluted carbide finishing
bur (Midwest No. 9803 or Brasseler No. 7801) to remove
any remaining excess resin-bonding medium.
If the porcelain margins are overextended beyond the
cavosurface angles or the marginal areas are too bulbous, recontouring of these areas is required (especially
along gingival margins) to ensure proper physiologic
contours and gingival health. A fine diamond instrument is used to recontour these areas (see Fig. 15-40, G).
Marginal areas should be confluent with surrounding
unprepared tooth surfaces when assessed with a No. 2
explorer. Lingual areas are best finished with an ovalshaped diamond instrument (see Fig. 15-40, H). Because
use of a diamond instrument breaks the glazed surface,
a series of appropriate instruments is used to restore a
smooth surface texture. First, a bullet-shaped, 30-fluted
carbide finishing bur (Midwest No. 9803 or Brasseler
No. 7801) is used to plane the porcelain surface and to
remove the striations created by the diamond instruments. Studies show that the best results occur if the diamond instruments are used with air and water coolant,
whereas the 30-fluted bur should be used dry. 26 Where
access allows, the porcelain is smoothed and polished
with a series of abrasive rubber, porcelain polishing
cups and points (Brasseler, Dialite Porcelain Polishing
Kit). Final surface luster is imparted through the use of
a porcelain-polishing paste, applied either with a rubber
prophy cup or a felt wheel (Fig. 15-40,1). This step is optional if a suitable polish has been attained with the polishing points and cups. The completed veneers are
shown in Fig. 15-40, J to L. A similar example of a completed case using etched porcelain veneers is seen in
Fig. 15-41.
Etched porcelain veneers also can be effectively used
to restore malformed anterior teeth conservatively. Malformed lateral incisors are seen in Fig. 15-42, A. Incisallapping preparations that are extended well onto the
lingual surface are used (see Fig. 15-42, B). The resulting
restorations are virtually comparable to "three-quarter

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

Treatment of malformed teeth with porcelain veneer. A, Malformed lateral incisors.
15-42
B, An incisal-lapping preparation much like a 3/, crown in enamel is used. C, Final esthetic
results.
FIG

crowns" in porcelain. The final esthetic results are
shown in Fig. 15-42, C. Darkly discolored teeth are more
difficult to treat with porcelain veneers.
However, several modifications in the veneering technique can be used to enhance the final esthetic result.
First, the most important difference in technique is that
opaque porcelain is incorporated in the fabrication of
the veneers to induce more inherent masking. If the veneers are not inherently opaque, little chance exists for
adequate masking of a darkly stained tooth. Typically
5% to 15% opaque porcelain is required to achieve optimal masking. Exceeding 15% opaque porcelain dramatically reduces light penetration and results in a significant loss of esthetic vitality; the esthetic vitality or
lifelike appearance of teeth depends on light penetration (see Translucency in the section on artistic elements). Second, a slightly deeper tooth preparation can
be used to allow greater veneer thickness. However, the
preparation should always be restricted to enamel to ensure optimal bonding of the veneer to the tooth. Even
with improved dentin-bonding agents, the bonds to
dentin are less predictable or durable than those to
enamel because of the high variability and dynamic nature of dentin. Bonds to etched enamel are highly predictable and very durable.
Third, the laboratory can be instructed to use several
coats of a die-spacing medium on the laboratory model
to allow a slightly greater thickness of resin-bonding
medium. The die-spacing medium must not be extended closer than 1 mm to the margins to ensure adequate positioning of the veneer to the preparation during try-in and bonding and to provide for a slight
internal space. In a typical case, after preparation of the
anterior teeth for etched porcelain veneers (Fig. 15-43,
A), a window preparation design was used for the canines to preserve the functional occlusal path on tooth
structure. An incisal-lapping preparation was used on
the other teeth. An incisal view aptly illustrates the difference between the two designs (see Fig. 15-43, B). Soft
wax is placed in the lingual embrasures to prevent interproximal tearing during impression-making procedures (see Fig. 15-43, B). Incisal and facial views of the

completed veneers are seen in Fig. 15-43, C and D.
A similar case of darkly discolored teeth showing
prepared teeth and postoperative result is seen in
Fig. 15-44, A and B.
Patients who possess darkly stained teeth always
should be informed that although porcelain (or composite) veneers can result in improved esthetics, they
may not entirely eliminate or mask very dark stains.
Moreover, because of the limited thickness of the veneers and the absolute necessity of incorporating intrinsic opacity, the lifelike translucency or esthetic vitality of
veneered teeth may never be comparable to that of natural, unaffected teeth (see Fig. 15-9, A and B). Full porcelain coverage with all-ceramic crowns may be indicated
in some patients with severe discoloration because of
the crowns greater capacity to restore esthetic vitality.
Nonetheless, porcelain veneers are a viable option in
most cases for the patient who desires esthetic improvement without significant tooth reduction.
Pressed Ceramic Veneers. Another esthetic alternative for veneering teeth is the use of pressed ceramics,
such as IPS Empress. Unlike etched porcelain veneers
that are fabricated by stacking and firing feldspathic
porcelain, pressed ceramic veneers are literally cast using a lost wax technique. Excellent esthetics are possible
using pressed ceramic materials for most cases involving mild-to-moderate discoloration. However, because
of the more translucent nature of pressed ceramic veneers, dark discolorations are best treated with etched porcelain veneers. The clinical technique for placing pressed
ceramic veneers, such as those made by IPS Empress, is
not markedly different from that for feldspathic porcelain veneers (other than the need for a slightly greater
tooth reduction depth).
The procedures for tooth preparation, try-in, and
bonding of pressed veneers are the same as for etched
porcelain veneers except that the marginal fit is often
superior. For that reason, little marginal finishing is often necessary. Only the excess bonding medium needs
to be removed. A typical case involving pressed ceramic
veneers, showing before and after treatment views is
seen in Fig. 15-45.

C H A P T E R 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG

15-43 Treatment of darkly discolored
teeth with porcelain veneers. A, Tetracyclinestained anterior teeth (including first premol ars) shown following preparation for etched
porcelain veneers. B, Incisal view shows window preparation design on canines and incisal-lapping design on remaining prepared
teeth. Soft wax is used to block out lingual
embrasures to facilitate impression making.
C and D, Incisal and facial views of completed
etched porcelain veneers.

FIG 15-44 Darkly stained teeth treated with
porcelain veneers. Old, defective direct-composite veneers are seen. A, Before treatment.
B, After.

A

VENEERS FOR METAL RESTORATIONS
Esthetic inserts (i.e., partial or full veneers) of a toothcolored material can be placed on the facial surface of a
tooth previously restored with a metal restoration. For
new castings, plans are made at the time of tooth preparation and during laboratory development of the wax
pattern to incorporate a veneer into the cast restoration.
After such a casting has been cemented, the veneer can
be inserted as described in the next section, except that
the portion of mechanical retention of the veneer into
the casting has been provided in the wax pattern stage.
Veneers for Existing Metal Restorations. Occasionally the facial portion of an existing metal restoration
(amalgam or gold) is judged to be distracting (Fig.
15-46, A). A careful examination, including a radiograph, is required to determine that the existing restoration is sound before an esthetic correction is made. The
size of the unesthetic area determines the extent of the
preparation. Anesthesia is not usually required, because
the preparation is in metal and enamel. Preliminary procedures consist of cleaning the area with pumice, selecting the shade, and isolating the site with a cotton roll.
When the unesthetic metal extends subgingivally, the
level of the gingival tissue is marked on the restoration

with a sharp explorer and a retraction cord is placed in
the gingival crevice. Rubber dam isolation may be required in some instances.
A No. 2 carbide bur rotating at high speed with an airwater spray is used to remove the metal, starting at a
point midway between the gingival and occlusal margins. The preparation is made perpendicular to the surface (a minimum of approximately 1 mm in depth),
leaving a butt joint at the cavosurface margins. The
1-mm depth and butt joint should be maintained as the
preparation is extended occlusally. All of the metal
along the facial enamel is removed, and the preparation
is extended into the facial and occlusal embrasures just
enough for the veneer to hide the metal. The contact
areas on the proximal or occlusal surfaces must not be in-

complete the outline form
the preparation is extended gingivally approximately
1 mm past the mark indicating the clinical level of the
gingival tissue.
The final preparation should have the same features
as those described for veneers in new cast restorations.
Mechanical retention is placed in the gingival area
with a No. '/,carbide bur (using air coolant to enhance
vision) 0.25 mm deep along the gingivoaxial and lincluded in the preparation. To

C H A P T E R 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-45 Pressed ceramic veneers (IPS Empress). A through C, Before treatment, facial views.
D through F, Esthetic result after completed veneers. (Courtesy of Dr. Luiz N. Baratieri.)

FIG 15-46 Veneer for existing cast restoration. A, Mesiofacial portion of onlay is distracting to
patient. B, Model of tooth and preparation. Note 90-degree cavosurface angle and retention prepared in gold and cavosurface bevel in enamel. C, Clinical preparation ready for composite
resin. D, Completed restoration.

629

C H A P T E R 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-47 Repairing veneer. A, Fractured veneer on maxillary canine. B, Preparation with
round-diamond instrument. C, Undercuts placed in existing veneer with a No. '/, bur. D, Completed preparation is shown isolated and etched. E, Veneer restored to original color and
contour.

guoaxial angles. Retention and esthetics are enhanced
by beveling the enamel cavosurface margin (approximately 0.5 mm wide) with the coarse, flame-shaped
diamond instrument oriented at 45 degrees to the external tooth surface (see Fig. 15-46, B). After it is etched,
rinsed, and dried, the preparation is complete (see Fig.
15-46, C). Adhesive resin liners containing 4-methyloxy
ethyl trimellitic anhydride (4-META), capable of bonding composite to metal, also may be used but are quite
technique sensitive.8 Manufacturers' instructions should
be followed explicitly to ensure optimal results with
these materials. The composite material is inserted and
finished in the usual manner (see Fig. 15-46, D).

REPAIRS OF VENEERS
Failures of esthetic veneers occur because of breakage,
discoloration, or wear. Consideration should be given to
conservative repairs of veneers if examination reveals
that the remaining tooth and restoration are sound. It is
not always necessary to remove all of the old restoration. The material most commonly used for making repairs is light-cured composite.
Veneers on Tooth Structure. Small chipped areas on
veneers can often be corrected by recontouring and polishing. When a sizable area is broken, it can usually be
repaired if the remaining portion is sound (Fig. 15-47, A).
For direct composite veneers, repairs ideally should be
made with the same material that was used originally.
After cleaning the area and selecting the shade, the operator should roughen the damaged surface of the veneer or tooth or both with a coarse, tapered, rounded
end diamond instrument to form a chamfered cavosur-

face margin (see Fig. 15-47, B). Roughening with microetching (i.e., sandblasting) is also effective. For more
positive retention, mechanical locks may be placed in
the remaining composite material with a small, round
bur (see Fig. 15-47, C). Acid etchant is applied to clean
the prepared area and etch any exposed enamel that is
then rinsed and dried (see Fig. 15-47, D). Next, a resinbonding agent is applied to the preparation (i.e., existing composite and enamel) and polymerized. Composite is then added, cured, and finished in the usual
manner (see Fig. 15-47, E).
Indirect processed composite veneers are repaired in a
similar manner. However, to repair porcelain veneers, a
mild hydrofluoric acid preparation, suitable for intraoral use, must be used to etch the fractured porcelain.
Hydrofluoric acid gels are available in approximately
10% buffered concentrations that are intended for intraoral porcelain repairs. Although caution still must be
taken when using hydrofluoric acid gels intraorally, the
lower acid concentration allows for relatively safe intraoral use. Full-strength hydrofluoric acid should never be
used intraorally for etching porcelain. Isolation of the
porcelain veneer to be repaired should be accomplished
with a rubber dam to protect the gingival tissues from
the irritating effects of the hydrofluoric acid. The manufacturer's instructions must be followed regarding application time of the hydrofluoric acid gel to ensure optimal porcelain etching. A lightly frosted appearance,
similar to that of etched enamel, should be seen if the
porcelain has been properly etched. A silane coupling
agent may be applied to the etched porcelain surface before the resin-bonding agent is applied. Composite ma-

CHAPTER 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG

15-48 Replacing faulty veneers in metal restorations with light-cured composite veneers.
A, Acrylic resin veneers stained and worn after 18 years of service. B, Removal of existing veneers with a carbide bur. C, Mechanical retention is placed in metal with a No. 33'/ 2 bur.
D, Masking agent (opaquing resin) is needed to cover metal surface. This material also may provide metal adhesion. E, Composite material is added and cured in the first preparation. The
same steps are repeated for second veneer. F, Both veneers completed.
terial is then added, cured, and finished in the usual
manner. Large fractures are best treated by replacing the
entire porcelain veneer.
Faulty Veneers in Metal Restorations. Fig. 15-48, A,
illustrates two faulty acrylic resin veneers on gold
crowns that need replacing after 18 years because of
wear and discoloration. The teeth are cleaned with a
slurry of pumice and the shade selected before isolation
by cotton rolls and retraction cords. With superficial
wear or staining, part of the old restoration (silicate cement, acrylic, or composite) can be left to achieve some
masking of the underlying metal. In this example, all of
the old resin material is removed with an appropriate
instrument, such as a No. 1558 carbide metal cutting bur
(see Fig. 15-48, B). Both preparations are accomplished
together. The outline of each preparation is extended
gingivally by removing some of the gold. The operator
should try to create a chamfered finish line. Retention is
placed with a No. 331/2 carbide bur in selected areas in
the metal along the line angles approximately 0.25 mm
deep (see Fig. 15-48, C). If available, a chairside air abrasion device, such as the Microetcher (Danville Engineering) unit, can be used to sandblast the preparation
to enhance micromechanical retention. If not, the preparation can be roughened internally with a course diamond to enhance retention.
Although the preparations are done simultaneously,
it is usually better to place the veneers one at a time. A
light-cured composite is recommended because of the
extended working time. Polyester strips are placed be-

tween the proximal surfaces. The preparation is cleaned
with acid etchant for 30 seconds, then rinsed and dried
to remove debris and obtain a clean, dry surface. In this
instance, the acid is used only to clean the surface, not
to etch the metal. Wedges placed in the gingival embrasure may help to establish proper contour of the matrix.
A masking material (opaquing resin) is artfully placed
with a small brush over the metal areas of the preparation by applying and curing successive thin layers (see
Fig. 15-48, D). Adhesive resin liners containing 4-META
(or other resin monomers capable of bonding to metal)
also may be used to achieve additional retention and
some masking. These materials should be placed directly over the prepared metal surface. Manufacturers'
instructions should be followed closely to ensure optimal results with these materials because they are quite
sensitive to proper technique.
Next, a small amount of composite material (i.e., gingival shade) is placed at the cervical area with a hand instrument, adapted with the tine of a No. 2 explorer, and
cured with visible light. Now material of the preselected
lighter shade is added to restore the middle and incisal
portions; a small brush is helpful in smoothing the surface and obtaining the final contour before curing. Finishing is delayed except for removing any excess contour at the mesiofacial embrasure (see Fig. 15-48, E).
Evaluation of the width of the teeth can be achieved
with a Boley gauge or another appropriate caliper. The
second preparation is abraded, cleaned, and dried before the opaque or adhesive liner is added. Composite

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

nique satisfies these criteria. Light-cured composites are
recommended for splinting, because they afford extended working time for placement and contouring.

material is inserted and cured as described for the first
veneer. The retraction cords are removed, and both
restorations are finished together to obtain symmetric
contours (see Fig. 15-48, F).

PERIODONTALLY INVOLVED TEETH
Loss of bone support allows movement of teeth, resulting
in increased irritation to the supporting tissues and possible malpositioning of the teeth. Stabilizing mobile teeth
is a valuable treatment aid before, during, and after periodontal therapy. Splinting the teeth aids in occlusal adj ustment and tissue healing, thus allowing better evaluation of the progression and prognosis of treatment.
A resin-bonded splint via the acid-etch technique is a
conservative and effective method of protecting the
teeth from further injury by stabilizing them in a favorable occlusal relationship. If the periodontal problem is
complicated by missing teeth, a bridge incorporating a
splint design is indicated (see Conservative Bridges).
Techniques for Splinting Anterior Teeth. In short
span segments subject to minimal occlusal forces, a relatively simple technique can be used for splinting periodontally involved teeth. Fig. 15-49, A, illustrates a maxillary lateral incisor that remains mobile because of

ACID-ETCHED, RESINBONDED SPLINTS
There are many causes for mobility of teeth: traumatic
injury to the face, advanced periodontal disease, habits
such as thumb sucking and tongue thrusting, and malocclusion. In addition, teeth often need stabilization and
retention after orthodontic treatment. In the past, clinical procedures for the stabilization of teeth either involved extensive loss of tooth structure or were poor in
appearance. A conservative and esthetic alternative has
been made possible by using acid-etched, resin-bonded
splints.
Certain criteria must be met when mobile teeth are
splinted. Occlusal adjustment may be necessary initially.
The splint should have a hygienic design so that the patient is able to maintain good oral hygiene. It also should
allow further diagnostic procedures and treatment, if
necessary. The acid-etched, resin-bonded splinting tech-

A

B

C

FIG. 15-49 Splinting and recontouring a mobile tooth using a light-cured composite. A, Maxill ary right lateral incisor is mobile from lack of bone support. B, Preparations completed and
etched. C, Splinted and recontoured tooth after 4 years.

FIG 15-50

Splinting maxillary anterior teeth
with composite only. A, All maxillary incisors
are loose and need splinting. B, Preparation
consists of roughening proximal surfaces
and creating slight diastemas to provide bulk
to the connector areas of the composite
splint. C, Splint contoured and finished. D,
Teeth and splint remain stable at 3-year recall.

D

CHAPTER 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

insufficient bone support even after occlusal adjustment
and elimination of a periodontal pocket. Esthetic recontouring with composite augmentation can be accomplished along with the splinting procedure.
Anesthesia is generally not required for a splinting
procedure when enamel covers the clinical crown.
However, when root surfaces are exposed and extreme
sensitivity exists, local anesthesia is necessary. The teeth
are cleaned with a pumice slurry, and the shade of lightcured composite is selected. A cotton roll and retraction
cords are used for isolation in this instance.
With a coarse, flame-shaped diamond instrument, the
enamel on both teeth at the proximal contact area is reduced to produce an interdental space approximately
1 mm wide. This amount of space will enhance the
strength of the splint by providing more bulk of composite material in the connector between the teeth.
Other enamel areas of the tooth or teeth that need more
contour are prepared by roughening the surface with a
coarse diamond instrument. Where no enamel is present, such as on the root surface, a dentin-bonding agent
is used following the manufacturer's instructions. Optionally, a mechanical lock is prepared with a No. 1/4
round bur in the dentin at the gingivoaxial line angle of
the boxlike preparation. After the prepared enamel surfaces are acid-etched, rinsed, and dried, a lightly frosted
appearance should be observed (see Fig. 15-49, B).
The enamel- and dentin-bonding agent is applied,
lightly blown with air, and polymerized. A hand instrument is used to place a small amount of composite material in the gingival area. Additional shaping with a
No. 2 explorer will reduce the amount of finishing necessary later. It is helpful to add and cure the composite
in small increments, building from the gingival toward
the incisal aspect. Finishing is accomplished with round
and flame-shaped carbide burs, fine diamonds, and pol-

FIG

15-51 Periodontal splint of mobile
mandibular incisors reinforced with wire
mesh (Splint-Grid, Ellman International Mfg.,
Hwelett, NY 11557). A, Mobile periodontally
i nvolved teeth before treatment. B, Teeth isol ated with rubber dam. C, Lingual view of
completed splint. D, Facial view of splint after treatment.

ishing discs and points. The retraction cord is removed,
and the occlusion is evaluated to assess centric contacts
and functional movements. Instructions on brushing
and flossing are reviewed with the patient. Results at
4 years are illustrated in Fig. 15-49, C.
Another indication for splinting periodontally involved teeth is illustrated in Fig. 15-50, A. All of the
maxillary incisors are mobile from lack of periodontal
support. Typically, the incisors are weaker than the canines because of the difference in root length. To stabilize the incisors, a composite splint must include all of
the maxillary anterior teeth. The same procedures are
followed as before, except that a rubber dam is used to
isolate the teeth. After etching, rinsing, and drying procedures (see Fig. 15-50, B), a light-cured composite is inserted, polymerized, and finished (see Fig. 15-50, C).
The completed splint is shown after 3 years of service
(see Fig. 15-50, D).
Splinting also can be used when the mandibular incisors are mobile from severe bone loss. The same general steps are followed as with the maxillary teeth.
However, if further reinforcement is deemed necessary,
a stainless steel mesh, such as Splint-Grid (Ellman International Mfg., Hewlett, NY 11557), or a plasmacoated woven polyethylene strip, such as Ribbond (Ribbond Inc., Seattle, WA 98101) can be used to strengthen
the splint (Figs. 15-51 and 15-52). Once the interproximal connectors are completed, the lingual surfaces are
roughened and acid-etched. Bonding agent is applied
and cured; a small amount of composite is placed onto
the lingual surfaces (but not cured) to receive the auxiliary splinting strip. An appropriate length of splinting
material (wire mesh or polyethylene-coated woven fabric) is cut and pressed into the uncured composite. Once
adapted to the lingual surfaces, the composite is cured
to hold the strip in place. Additional composite is used

C H A P T E R 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG
15-52 Splinting of mobile mandibular
i ncisors reinforced with a plasma-coated,
polyethylene-woven strip (Ribbond, Ribbond
I nc., Seattle, WA 98101). A, Mobile periodontally involved mandibular teeth before splinti ng. B, Lingual view of completed splint.

FIG
15-53 Stabilizing teeth after orthodontic treatment. A, Patient with existing removable retainer. B, Residual spaces resulting
from undersized teeth. C, Closure of spaces
with composite additions is completed. D,
Orthodontic wire is held in position with dental tape and bonded to place with composite.

to completely overlay the reinforcing material. Care
must be taken to cover the wire mesh completely with
composite to avoid rough, irritating edges. After finishing procedures, the rubber dam is removed and the occlusion is evaluated.

STABILIZATION OF TEETH
AFTER ORTHODONTIC TREATMENT
After orthodontic treatment, teeth may require stabilization using either fixed or removable appliances. The
latter method allows continued minor movements for
final positioning of the teeth. Once this position is
reached it is better to stabilize the teeth with a fixed retainer. Removable retainers tend to irritate the soft tissue. Also they may be damaged, lost, or not worn,
which usually allows undesired movement of the teeth.
Fig. 15-53, A, shows a patient with a removable orthodontic retainer. Optimal positioning of the teeth has
been achieved by orthodontic movement; however, stabilization of the teeth is required, and the unattractive
spaces caused by undersized maxillary teeth need to be
closed (see Fig. 15-53, B). A carefully planned appointment is required to accomplish the following: (1) remove any fixed orthodontic appliance, (2) add composite to close the diastemas, and (3) stabilize the teeth with
a twisted stainless steel wire and composite.

Technique. After the orthodontic appliance is removed and routine procedures followed for closing the
diastemas (see Fig. 15-53, C, the occlusion is carefully
examined to determine the best position for locating the
twisted wire, because it will be placed only on the lingual surfaces. A sufficient length of twisted stainless
steel wire (i.e., 0.0175 inch [0.45 mm] in diameter) is
adapted to the lingual surface of the anterior teeth. A
stone cast is helpful for adapting the wire. The wire
must rest against the lingual surfaces passively without
tension or interference with the occlusion. In the mouth,
waxed dental tape is used to position the wire against
the teeth and hold it in place while occlusal excursions
are evaluated. The wire will be attached only to the lingual fossa of each tooth. After the position of the wire
has been determined it is removed, and the enamel in
the fossae only (not the marginal ridges or embrasures)
is etched, rinsed, and dried.
A light-cured composite is best used for attaching the
fixed wire splint. The wire is repositioned and held in
place with dental tape, while a sparing amount of resinbonding agent is applied and lightly blown with air.
After polymerization of the bonding agent, a small
amount of composite material is placed to encompass
the wire in each fossa and bond it to the enamel. The
operator must be careful not to involve the proximal

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

15-54
Splinting avulsed teeth. A, Patient with traumatically avulsed maxillary right incisors. B, Orthodontic wire is positioned and bonded to adjacent uninvolved teeth with composite. C, Completed splint stabilizes repositioned incisors.
FIG .

surfaces (see Fig. 15-53, D). After polymerization of the
composite, the occlusion is evaluated and adjusted as
needed for proper centric contacts and functional
movements.
This unique splint allows some physiologic movement of the teeth, yet it holds them in the correct position. The splint should remain in place for at least
6 months to ensure stabilization. Longer retention may
be necessary, depending on the individual situation and
recommendations of the orthodontist.
AVULSED OR PARTIALLY AVULSED TEETH
Facial injuries often involve the hard and soft tissues of
the mouth. The damage may range from lacerations of
the soft tissue to fractures of the teeth and alveolar bone.
There can be partial or complete avulsion of teeth. Maxillary central incisors are involved more often than other
teeth. A thorough clinical examination of soft tissue,
lips, tongue, and cheeks should be made for lacerations
and embedded tooth fragments and debris. Radiographic examination is necessary to diagnose deeply
embedded fragments or root fractures.
Treatment of soft-tissue lacerations should include
lavage, conservative debridement, and suturing. Consultation with or referral to an oral surgeon may be
necessary. A partially avulsed tooth is repositioned
digitally and may or may not need splinting. Traumatically avulsed teeth that are reimplanted immediately or
within 30 minutes have a good prognosis for being retained . 2 -38 After 30 minutes the rate of success drops
rapidly. Therefore the avulsed tooth should be repositioned as soon as possible. In the interim it should be
placed in a moist environment, such as saliva (i.e., held
in the cheek or under the tongue), milk, saline, or wet
towel. The replacement of avulsed teeth has immediate
psychologic value and maintains the natural space in
the event that a fixed prosthesis is required later.
Technique.
The maxillary right incisors that were
completely avulsed in an accident (Fig. 15-54, A) are
repositioned immediately. After the teeth are repositioned, radiographs reveal that no other complications
exist. Isolation with cotton rolls or gauze is preferred to

use of a rubber dam, which could cause malpositioning
of the loose teeth. The occlusion should be evaluated to
ensure that the teeth are properly positioned.
The facial surfaces of the crowns are quickly cleaned
with hydrogen peroxide, rinsed, and dried by blotting
with a gauze or cotton roll or by lightly blowing with
air. The dentist should avoid blowing air into areas of
avulsion or deep wounds to prevent the possibility of
air emboli. If a crown is fractured, any deeply exposed
dentin should be covered with calcium hydroxide to
protect the pulp. A twisted orthodontic wire (0.0195 inch
[0.49 mm]) must be long enough to cover the facial (or
lingual) surfaces of enough teeth to stabilize the loose
teeth. The wire is adapted and the ends rounded to prevent irritation to the soft tissue. In an emergency a disinfected paper clip can be used as a temporary splint.
No preparation of the enamel surface is necessary
other than that provided by acid-etching the enamel.
The middle third of the facial surfaces are etched,
rinsed, and dried of all visible moisture. Again, drying
should be accomplished by blotting with a gauze or cotton roll and a light stream of air. A self-cured or lightcured composite may be used. The wire is positioned
and held lightly in place, while the ends are attached
with the composite material (see Fig. 15-54, B). Light
pressure is applied to the repositioned teeth as the facial
surfaces are bonded to the wire in succession (see Fig.
15-54, C). Care is exercised not to allow the composite to
flow into the proximal areas. Once the teeth are stabilized, any fractured areas can be conservatively repaired
by the acid-etch, resin-bond technique. Finishing is accomplished by a flame-shaped, carbide finishing bur
and abrasive discs. The occlusion is evaluated carefully
to ensure that no premature contacts exist.
The patient is advised to gently care for the involved
teeth. Antibiotic therapy may be required if the alveolar
bone is fractured or significant soft-tissue damage has
occurred. Tetanus shots or boosters are advised if indicated by the nature of the accident; the patient's physician should be contacted regarding this need. Appointments are made for follow-up examinations on a weekly
basis for the first month. The patient is alerted to the

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

symptoms of pulpal necrosis and advised to call if a
problem develops. If a root canal therapy is required, it
is better accomplished with the splint in position.
Removal of the splint is accomplished in 4 to 8 weeks,
provided recall visits have shown normal pulp test results
and the teeth are asymptomatic. The wire is sectioned,
and the resin material is removed with a flame-shaped,
carbide finishing bur at high speed with air-water spray
and a light, intermittent application. Abrasive discs are
used to polish the teeth to a high luster.

CONSERVATIVE BRIDGES
In selected cases, conservative bridges can be made by
acid-etching enamel and bonding a pontic to the adjacent natural teeth. These conservative bridges are classified according to the type of pontic: (1) natural tooth
pontic; (2) denture tooth pontic; (3) pontic, either of
porcelain-fused-to-metal pontic or all-metal pontic with
metal retainers; and (4) all-porcelain pontic. Although
the four types differ in the degree of permanency, they
share a major advantage-conservation of natural tooth
structure. In addition, they can be viable alternatives to
conventional fixed bridges in circumstances where age,
expense, or clinical impracticality are considerations.
It should be noted that because of the conservative
preparation and bonded nature of all of these bridge
types, retention is never as strong as for a conventional
bridge. As part of informed consent, patients should be
told of the potential, although remote, for swallowing or
aspirating bonded bridges that are dislodged. Furthermore, to reduce the risk of dislodgement, patients
should be cautioned not to bite hard foods or objects
with bonded bridge pontics.
The ideal site for a conservative bridge is where the
edentulous space is no wider than one or two teeth.
Other considerations include bite relation, oral hygiene,
periodontal condition, and extent of caries, defects, and
restorations in the abutment teeth. Conservative bridges
are especially indicated for young patients, because the
teeth usually have large pulp chambers and short clinical crowns. Many older patients with gingival recession
and mobile teeth are prime candidates because splinting
can be incorporated with the bridge. More specific indications and clinical procedures for each of the four types
of bridges are presented in the following sections.
NATURAL TOOTH PONTIC

The crowns of natural teeth (primarily incisors) often
can be used as acid-etched, resin-bonded pontics. Considerations for this type of treatment occur when: (1) periodontally involved teeth warrant extraction, (2) teeth
have fractured roots, (3) teeth are unsuccessfully reimplanted after avulsion, and (4) root canal treatment has
been unsuccessful. However lost, the immediate replacement of a natural anterior tooth has great psychologic value for most patients, although the procedure

may be temporary. Natural tooth pontics also can be
placed as interim restorations until an extraction site
heals if conditions require a conventional bridge or an
implant.
Certain prerequisites must exist to ensure a successful
result: (1) the extracted tooth and abutments must be in
reasonably good condition, especially the pontic, because it may become brittle and more susceptible to
fracture; (2) the abutment teeth should be fairly stable;
and (3) the tooth to be replaced because a pontic must
not participate in heavy centric or functional occlusion.
Because of this third restriction, canines and posterior
teeth are not usually good candidates for this procedure. If the adjacent teeth are mobile, it is frequently
necessary to secure them by splinting with composite
(see Acid-Etched, Resin-Bonded Splints).
Technique. A maxillary right central incisor must be
extracted for periodontal reasons (Fig. 15-55, A and B).
Before the tooth is extracted, a small, round bur is used
to place a shallow identifying mark on the facial surface
to indicate the level of the gingival crest. Following extraction, a 2 x 2 inch (5 x 5 cm) sponge is held in the
space with pressure for hemorrhage control.
By using a separating disc or a diamond instrument,
the extracted tooth is transversely cut a few millimeters
apical to the identification mark. When pontic length is
determined, shrinkage of the healing tissue underlying
the pontic tip must be anticipated. The root end is
discarded.
If the pulp canal and chamber have completely calcified, the next procedure is shaping and polishing the
apical end of the natural tooth pontic as described in the
following paragraphs. If the chamber is calcified as disclosed on the radiograph and the canal is nearly calcified, the canal is opened from the apical end by using a
small round bur or diamond to the extent of the canal.
The operator should be as conservative of tooth structure as possible, yet provide access for subsequent injection of composite material to fill the canal. A large
chamber and canal are instrumented and debrided using conventional endodontic procedures with access
from the apical end (see Fig. 15-55, C). Access is provided for subsequent injection of composite. Removal of
the pulpal tissue in this manner prevents possible later
discoloration of the tooth caused by degeneration products. Traditional lingual access for instrumentation is
avoided to prevent weakening the pontic. Following
these procedures the canal (and chamber, if present) is
filled and closed with a self- or light-cured composite.
Light-cured materials must be placed incrementally to
ensure complete polymerization.
After the composite has been polymerized, the apical
end is contoured to produce a bullet-shaped ovate design (see Fig. 15-55, C). This design provides adaptation
of the pontic tip to the residual ridge, yet it allows the
tissue side of the pontic tip to be cleaned with dental

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

Resin-bonded maxillary natural-tooth pontic. A, Preoperative photograph before extraction of periodontally involved maxillary right central incisor. B, Extraction site immediately
following removal of incisor. C, Enlarged apical opening ready to be filled with composite. Pontic tip has been contoured to an ovate design. D, Abutment teeth isolated, roughened, and acidetched. E, Immediate postoperative photograph of natural-tooth pontic bonded in place.
F, Resin-bonded natural-tooth pontic with healed residual ridge 6 weeks later.
FIG . 15-55

floss. It is also by far the most esthetic pontic tip design
that can be used. While being contoured, the tip is occasionally evaluated by trying the pontic in the space. In
the maxillary arch, passive contact between the pontic
tip and the healed residual ridge is considered ideal for
maximal phonetic and esthetic potential. However, in
the mandibular arch (where esthetics is not generally a
problem) the pontic tip is best shaped into the same
bullet-shaped design but positioned as a hygienic
pontic type that does not contact tissue (Fig. 15-56, A).
The pontic tip is smoothed and polished using a
proper sequence of abrasive discs or polishing points. A
polished pontic tip not only is easier to clean, but it also
retains less plaque.
A rubber dam is usually needed for isolation of the region to prevent seepage of blood and saliva. Isolation
using cotton rolls and gingival retraction cords is acceptable if hemorrhage has been controlled. Any carious
lesions or faulty proximal restorations on involved
proximal surfaces of both the pontic and the abutments
are now restored with light-cured composite (preferably
the same material to be subsequently used for the
bridge connectors) by using modified preparation designs. It is recommended that the resulting restored surfaces be undercontoured rather than overcontoured to
facilitate positioning of the natural tooth pontic.
Next, the involved proximal surfaces on both the
abutment teeth and the pontic are roughened with a
coarse, flame-shaped diamond instrument. Spaces of

A

B

FIG 15-56 Pontic tip design. A, Hygienic-type pontic with
ovate or bullet-shaped tip. B, Modified ridge lap-type pontic
with slight concavity conforming to residual ridge.

approximately 0.5 mm should exist between the pontic
and the abutment teeth, because stronger connectors are
provided by the additional bulk of composite material.
Now the operator should acid-etch, rinse, and dry all
prepared (i.e., roughened) surfaces (see Fig. 15-55, D).
A light-cured composite is preferred for bonding natural tooth pontics, because the extended working time
allows the operator to contour the connectors before
polymerization. First, the resin-bonding agent is applied to the etched surfaces of the pontic and lightly
blown with air to remove the excess. Then it is polymerized by application of light, and the pontic is set

CHAPTER 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-57 Resin-bonded mandibular bridge
splint using natural-tooth pontic. A, Anterior
segment splinted with composite and abutment teeth isolated, roughened, and etched.
B, Natural-tooth pontic bonded in place.

aside (ready for bonding in the mouth). Next, the bonding agent is applied to the etched surfaces of the abutment teeth and cured. Then a small amount of composite material is placed on the proximal contact areas of
the natural tooth pontic, and the pontic is carefully inserted in the proper position in the mouth. The composite is shaped around the contact areas with an explorer tip. After final verification that the pontic
position is correct, the composite is polymerized with
light. Next, additional composite is applied in the proximal areas (more material is added on the lingual than
on the facial surface), contoured, and cured. Adequate
gingival embrasures must be provided to facilitate
flossing and ensure gingival health. After sufficient material has been added and polymerized, the embrasure
areas should be shaped and smoothed with carbide finishing burs or fine diamonds and polishing discs or
points. The rubber dam is removed, and the occlusion
is evaluated for centric contacts and functional movements. Heavy contacts on the pontic or the connector
areas must be adjusted. The finished bridge immediately after bonding is illustrated in Fig. 15-55, E. The
patient should return in 4 to 6 weeks for evaluation of
the relationship of the pontic tip to the tissue. Passive
contact should exist between the pontic tip and the underlying tissue to prevent ulceration. If tissue ulceration is present, the pontic must be removed, recontoured, and rebonded. The finished bridge and healed
residual ridge appear in Fig. 15-55, F.
As stated earlier, abutment teeth that are mobile can
often be splinted with composite to afford stability to periodontally involved teeth. The abutments are isolated,
roughened, and acid-etched (Fig. 15-57, A). Because esthetics is not as critical, a hygienic pontic tip is recommended for mandibular incisors (see Fig. 15-56, A). The
finished bridge splint is illustrated in Fig. 15-57, B.
DENTURE TOOTH PONTIC
An acrylic resin denture tooth can be used as a pontic
for the replacement of missing maxillary or mandibular
incisors by using the acid etch-resin bonding technique
(Fig. 15-58, A through H). Although this type of bridge
is sometimes used as an interim prosthesis and is called
a temporary bridge, it can be a viable alternative to a conventional bridge and may last for years in some circum-

stances. As with the natural tooth pontic, the major contraindications to this type of resin-bonded bridge are
abutment teeth that have extensive caries, restorations,
mobility, or a pontic area that is subjected to heavy occlusal forces.
In the illustrated example, the permanent maxillary
right lateral incisor is missing and the adjacent teeth are
in favorable condition and position (see Fig. 15-58, A).
Further examination reveals an ideal situation for a conservative bridge that uses a denture tooth pontic.
Technique. Although the entire procedure can be
completed at chairside in one appointment, considerable time can be saved by an indirect technique. During
the first appointment the shade (see Fig. 15-58, B) and
mold of the denture tooth are selected, and alginate impressions are made. In the laboratory, stone casts are
poured and the ridge area is relieved slightly and
marked with a soft-lead pencil. As the pontic is trial positioned, the pencil markings will rub off onto its tip to
facilitate contouring of this area (see Fig. 15-58, C). Contouring is best accomplished with acrylic burs and a
Burlew wheel in a straight handpiece. The tissue side of
the pontic should be contoured to a modified ridge lap
configuration that is convex mesiodistally and slightly
concave faciolingually (see Fig. 15-56, B). This type of
design not only allows the pontic tip to adapt to the
residual ridge, but it also allows for effective cleaning
with dental floss. After it is contoured, the pontic tip
should be smoothed and highly polished with pumice
and an acrylic-polishing agent (see Fig. 15-58, D).
Because composite does not normally bond to acrylic
resin, provisions must be made to facilitate a strong connection between the pontic and the adjacent teeth. One
provision may be completed in the laboratory by
preparing large Class III conventional preparations in
the pontic that will mechanically retain the composite
material. The outline of the preparations must be large
enough to provide adequate surface area of the composite restoration for bonding to the adjacent teeth (see
Fig. 15-58, E to G). An appropriately sized round bur
( No. 2 or No. 4) is used to cut each preparation to a
depth of approximately 1.5 mm and extend the outline
approximately 0.5 mm past the contact areas into the
gingival, incisal, and facial embrasures. Even more extension should be made into the lingual embrasure to

CHAPTER 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG . 15-58 Resin-bonded denture tooth pontic. A, Preoperative photograph showing missing
maxillary lateral incisor. B, Shade and mould selection. C, Positioning pontic on working model
while contouring. D, Contoured and polished pontic (lingual view). Outline form of Class III
preparations: facial (E), lingual (F), and proximal (G) views. H, Cross-section of denture tooth (longitudinal section) in plane ab as seen in (G) showing mechanical-retention form incisally and gingivally as prepared with a No. '/Z bur. I, Denture tooth pontic bonded in place with composite.

provide for bulk of composite material in the connector
areas. The lingual extensions should not be connected,
because this unnecessary step would unduly weaken
the pontic.
Mechanical undercuts are placed at the incisoaxial
and gingivoaxial line angles with a No. 1/ 2 bur to
mechanically lock the composite material (to be inserted
later in the technique) in the acrylic resin pontic (see
Fig. 15-58, G and H).
During the next appointment, the pontic is tried in
place to confirm that the shade and contours are correct.
There should be approximately 0.5 mm of space between each proximal "contact" and the abutment tooth.
The pontic is cleaned with acetone to remove dust and
debris. Retention of the pontic by undercuts, as previously described, also can be augmented by a second

provision-the conditioning of the proximal aspects of
the pontic with two applications of ethyl acetate, a polymer softener. A thin layer is applied in the Class III
preparations and on the cavosurface areas and allowed
to dry for 5 minutes. This process is repeated to ensure
optimal bonding. The preparations are filled with the
same light-cured composite material anticipated for
bonding the pontic in place. The composite should be
applied and cured in the retentive areas before the remainder of the preparation is filled. This step ensures
complete polymerization. After the entire preparation is
filled, it should be polymerized again with the light
source. It is better to leave the contact areas slightly undercontoured for the pontic to fit easily between the
abutment teeth. The pontic is set aside momentarily in a
safe place.

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

Isolation of the abutment teeth should be accomplished with cotton rolls and retraction cords (rather
than with a rubber dam) to better relate the pontic to the
residual ridge area. Any caries or old restorations in the
adjoining proximal areas of the abutment teeth should
be removed at this time, and any indicated liners applied. The proximal surfaces of the abutment teeth are
roughened with a coarse flame-shaped diamond instrument. This step is followed by acid-etching, rinsing, and
drying. The resin-bonding agent is applied, lightly
blown with air, and cured. Tooth preparations, if present,
are restored with the same composite material. Care is
taken not to overcontour the restoration or restorations.
The pontic is evaluated by positioning it temporarily
in the edentulous space. If adjustments are made, the
surfaces should be cleaned with acetone. Next, a small
amount of composite is wiped onto the contact areas
( mesial and distal) of the pontic, and the pontic is placed
into the proper position between the abutment teeth. An
explorer tip is helpful in placing the material evenly
around the contact area. Care must be taken to place the
pontic so that it lightly touches the ridge but does not
cause tissue blanching. The composite material used to
position the pontic is polymerized. It is helpful to add
and cure the additional composite in small increments
to obtain the correct contour and minimize finishing
procedures. The facial, incisal, and gingival embrasures
should be defined with a flame-shaped finishing bur or
fine diamond and polished with appropriate discs or
points. The lingual aspect of the bridge is contoured
with a round finishing bur without defining lingual embrasures because this could weaken the connectors. The
retraction cords are removed from the gingival crevice.
Articulating paper is used to mark the occlusion, and
any offensive contacts are removed. The final restoration is shown in Fig. 15-58, I.
PORCELAIN-FUSED-TO-METAL PONTIC OR
ALL-METAL PONTIC WITH METAL RETAINERS

A stronger and more permanent type of acid-etched,
resin-bonded bridge is possible by use of a cast metal
framework 31,39 In anterior areas where esthetics is a consideration, the design of the bridge includes a porcelainfused-to-metal pontic with metal winged retainers extending mesially and distally for attachment to the
proximal and lingual surfaces of the abutment teeth. In
posterior areas where esthetics is not a critical factor, the
bridge can have either a porcelain-fused-to-metal or an
all-metal pontic.
The technique is more complicated and time consuming than the previously described methods, because it
requires some initial tooth preparation, an impression,
laboratory procedures, and a second appointment for
etching and bonding. When compared with conventional bridges, resin-bonded bridges of this type offer
five distinct advantages:

1. Anesthesia is usually not required.
2. Tooth structure is conserved (i.e., no dentin involvement).
3. Gingival tissues are not irritated because margins
usually are not placed subgingivally.
4. An esthetic result can be obtained more easily.
5. The cost is less because not as much chair time is required and laboratory fees are lower.
Ideally this type of conservative bridge is used for
short spans in the anterior or posterior areas with sound
abutment teeth in good alignment. The most favorable
occlusal relationship exists where little or no centric
contact and only light functional contact are present.
However, the teeth can be prepared and the bridge
framework designed to withstand moderately heavy
occlusal forces. Orthodontics may be required to improve tooth alignment. The bridge also can be extended
to splint adjacent periodontally involved teeth. Crownlengthening procedures are sometimes indicated for
teeth with short clinical crowns.
Although minimal, some preparation of enamel of the
abutment teeth is mandatory in the retainer area of the
bridge to: (1) provide a definite path of insertion or seating or both, (2) enhance retention and resistance forms,
(3) allow for the thickness of the metal retainers, and (4)
provide physiologic contour to the final restoration. The
i mportance of tooth preparation design cannot be
overemphasized. The success of these types of bridges
depends on preparation design. The bridges must be independently retentive by design and cannot rely solely
on the bonding resin for retention. Preparation design
for these types of bridges is much like that for a cast
three-quarter crown; however, it is restricted to enamel.
The preparation for each abutment varies, depending
on the individual tooth position and anatomy. Approximately the same amount of surface area should be covered on each abutment tooth. In some situations recontouring of the adjacent and opposing teeth may be
indicated. The details of the preparations are described
later.
Two primary types of resin-bonded bridges with metal
retainers currently exist: (1) Rochette" and (2) Maryland .31
Each type has advantages and disadvantages.
The Rochette type uses small countersunk perforations in the retainer sections for retention and is best
suited for anterior bridges (Fig. 15-59, A) . 39 Care must be
exercised in placing the perforations to prevent weakening the framework. Perforations that are too large or
too closely spaced will invite failure of the metal retainer by fracture. The perforations should be approximately 1.5 to 2 mm apart and have a maximum diameter of 1.5 mm on the tooth side. Each hole is countersunk
so that the widest diameter is toward the outside of the
retainer. When the bridge is bonded with a bonding
medium, it is mechanically locked in place by micro-

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-59

Acid-etched, resin-bonded metal bridges. A, Rochette type. B, Maryland type.
C, Scanning electron micrograph of etched metal surface. (Courtesy of Dr. John Sturdevant.)

FIG 15-60

Cross-sectional diagram of two types of
resin-bonded bridges. A, In addition to acid-etching
prepared enamel surfaces (ae), the Rochette type uses
small countersunk perforations (p) in retainer section.
B, In Maryland type, tooth side of framework is either
etched to produce microscopic pores (mp) or bonded
with no etching with an adhesive cement.

scopic undercuts in the etched enamel and the countersunk holes in the retainer (Fig. 15-60, A).
Advantages of this design include:
It is easy to see the retentive perforations in the metal;
If the bridge must be removed or replaced, the bonding medium can be cut away in the perforations to facilitate easy removal; and
No metal etching is required.
Disadvantages of this design include:
The perforations could weaken the retainers if improperly sized or spaced;
• The exposed resin-bonding medium is subject to
wear; and
It is not possible to place perforations in proximal or
rest areas.
A second type of cast metal framework, commonly
known as the Maryland bridge, is reported to have im-

proved bonding strength (see Fig. 15-59, B).31,31 Instead
of perforations, the tooth side of the metal framework is
electrolytically or chemically etched, which produces
microscopic undercuts (see Fig. 15-59, C). The bridge is
attached with a self-cured, resin-bonding medium that
locks into the microscopic undercuts of both the etched
retainer and the etched enamel (see Fig. 15-60, B). It can
be used for both anterior and posterior bridges. Although this design has been reported to be stronger, it is
more technique sensitive because the retainers may not
be properly etched or may be contaminated before
cementation. Because the retentive features cannot be
seen with the unaided eye, the etched metal surfaces
must be examined under a microscope to verify proper
etching (minimum magnification).
More recently, Maryland bridges are fabricated with no
electrolytic etching of the surface and chemically bonded
to the tooth either following a process called silicoating or
with a 4-META or phosphate ester-containing, resinbonding medium.
Recall that resin materials containing 4-META or other resin monomers are capable of

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-61 Resin-bonded, porcelain-fused-to-metal maxillary anterior bridge. A, Congenitally
missing maxillary lateral incisor. B, Occlusion marked with articulating paper. C, Model with outli ne of preparations. D, Preparing lingual surface with diamond instrument. E, Working cast
shows proximal groove prepared (a second groove is on mesial of canine) to establish path of
i nsertion for prosthesis and provide positional stability and increase retention form. Completed
Rochette-type bridge from facial view (F) and lingual view (G). H, Teeth isolated with gingivalretraction cord and cotton rolls. Preparations are etched and ready for bonding. I, Holding
bridge in place during polymerization. Bonded bridge: facial view (J) and lingual view (K).
strongly bonding to metal surfaces .8,34 Surface roughening with microetching (i.e., sandblasting) is commonly
used in conjunction with these adhesive cements. These
types of Maryland bridges are referred to as adhesion
bridges and differ only in the means of retention. The design of adhesion bridges is the same for this alternative
Maryland bridge design.
Successes and failures have been observed with both
bonded bridge designs. Because the procedures are technique sensitive, every step must be carefully followed.

Maxillary Anterior Bridge. In Fig. 15-61, A, a maxillary lateral incisor is congenitally missing, and the teeth
on either side are sound. The occlusion is favorable, and
there are no periodontal problems (see Fig. 15-61, B).
The patient has been wearing a removable partial denture that is undesirable. Radiographs and study casts
are made to complete the diagnosis and to facilitate
preparation design. The outline of the proposed preparation is penciled on the cast to cover as much enamel
surface as possible for maximal bonding area, but with

CHAPTER 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

the following two stipulations: (1) the lingual portions
are extended neither subgingivally nor too far incisally,
and (2) the proximal portions are not extended facially
of the contact areas but enough to allow preparation of
retention grooves (see Fig. 15-61, C and E).
Before tooth preparation, clean the teeth, select the
shade of the pontic, and mark the occlusion with articulating paper to evaluate centric contact or contacts and
functional movements. If adjustment or recontouring of
the abutment teeth is indicated, it should be accomplished at this time. When a base metal alloy is used
rather than high gold alloys for the bridge framework,
less tooth structure is removed because the metal retainers can be made thinner. Base metal alloys have superior tensile strength.
Preparation. Make several depth cuts (0.3 to 0.5 mm)
in the enamel with a small, round, coarse diamond instrument (1 to 1.5 mm in diameter). Join the depth cuts
with the same instrument or a round diamond instrument (see Fig. 15-61, D). A large surface area (i.e., outline
form) is desirable to obtain maximum bonding and
strength of the bridge. A shallow groove is cut in the
enamel of each proximal portion of the preparations with
a small, tapered, cylindrical diamond instrument to establish a path of draw in an incisal direction. This feature provides a definite path of insertion and positional
stability for the prosthesis during try-in and bonding
(see Fig. 15-61, E). In addition, the retention of the
bridge is improved because a shear force is required to
unseat the bridge. Fig. 15-61, E, illustrates this groove on
the working cut.
Make an elastomeric impression of the completed
preparations and a bite registration. The patient continues to wear the partial denture as a temporary prosthesis. A small amount of self-curing acrylic resin is added
to the mesial and distal portions of the removable partial denture tooth to maintain proximal relationships.
Laboratory Phase. The impression, bite registration,
patient information, and instructions are sent to the
dental laboratory. A perforated retention design (i.e.,
Rochette) is specified in this instance, although the other
types could be used. The bridge is fabricated in the laboratory (porcelain contoured but unglazed and perforations prepared in the retainers).
Try-In Stage. During the initial try-in the bridge is examined for proper shade, contour, tissue compatibility,
marginal fit, and occlusion. Adjustments are made, and
the bridge is returned to the laboratory for corrections
(if needed), glazing, and polishing of the metal framework. Fig. 15-61, F and G, shows the completed bridge
from facial and lingual views.
Bonding Steps. The steps in bonding require an exacting coordination between the dentist and assistant.
All of the equipment and materials needed for isolation,
etching, and bonding must be available at the beginning
of the appointment: prophylaxis angle handpiece,
pumice slurry, a self-curing, resin-bonding medium kit

with all accessories, plastic hand instrument, polyester
strip, and cotton rolls. Alternatively, rubber dam isolation also can be used and is recommended, particularly
for placement of posterior bonded bridges.
The abutment teeth are cleaned with pumice slurry,
rinsed, dried, and isolated with cotton rolls. If the cervical area of the retainer is subgingival, insert a retraction
cord in the gingival crevice to displace the tissue and
prevent seepage. The bridge should be carefully tried in
place to review the path of insertion and verify the fit.
On removal, place it in a convenient location near where
the resin-bonding medium will be mixed.
Artfully apply the etching gel for 30 seconds to the
prepared enamel and slightly past the margins. The acid
must not be allowed to flow onto the unprepared proximal areas of the abutment or adjacent teeth. After rinsing the teeth, dry them of all visible moisture (see Fig.
15-61, H). If a lightly frosted surface is not present, the
etching procedure is repeated. It is emphasized that a
clean, dry surface is absolutely essential. The slightest
amount of saliva will contaminate the etched enamel
and necessitate an additional 10 seconds of etching, followed by rinsing and drying. A rubber dam is preferred
for isolation; however, cotton rolls and gingival retraction cord will provide adequate isolation in selected
areas where salivary flow can be controlled.
The manufacturer's instructions for the bonding procedure should be read and followed. Usually equal
parts of the resin-bonding medium (i.e., base and catalyst) are placed on one mixing pad, and equal parts of
the bonding agent (i.e., base and catalyst) are placed on
another mixing pad. The operator mixes the bonding
agent with a small, foam sponge or brush and quickly
paints a thin layer on the tooth side of the bridge and
then onto the etched enamel. While the operator uses
the air syringe to blow the excess bonding agent off
the bridge and then the enamel, the assistant mixes the
resin-bonding medium and places a thin layer on the
tooth side of the bridge retainers. The bridge is positioned on the abutment teeth and held in place with a
polyester strip over the lingual surface. The retainers are
seated and held firmly in place with the index fingers
positioned on the strip over the lingual retainers, and
the thumbs are held on the facial aspect of the abutment
teeth to equalize the pressure (see Fig. 15-61, I). The
amount of resin-bonding medium at the facial and gingival embrasures is quickly inspected. Sometimes the
assistant may need to add more resin-bonding medium
or remove excess unpolymerized resin with an explorer
or plastic instrument. Priority is given to the gingival
embrasure, because later correction is more difficult in
this area.
Finishing Procedure. After the resin-bonding
medium has hardened, remove the polyester strip and
inspect the lingual area. If voids are present, more resin
is mixed and added. Additions will bond to the previously placed resin-bonding medium without additional

CHAPTER 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-62 A and B, Anterior resin-bonded
bridge with multiple pontics. Before and
after views of a porcelain-fused-to-metal,
resin-bonded bridge replacing both maxill ary central incisors.

FIG 15-63 Resin-bonded mandibular anterior porcelain-fused-to-metal bridge and
splint. A, Patient wearing ill-fitting removable-acrylic partial denture. B, Edentulous
space resulting from missing mandibular central incisors. C, Laboratory model with
preparations outlined. D, Lingual view of completed prosthesis (Rochette type with
multiple countersunk perforations). E, Facial view of completed prosthesis. F, Lingual
view of prosthesis bonded in place with composite. Anterior segment is stabilized by
splinting effect of bridge retainers. G, Facial view of porcelain-fused-to-metal pontics
bonded in place.

surface treatment. Remove excess resin along the lingual margins with a discoid-cleoid hand instrument,
evaluate the occlusion, and adjust if necessary. Contouring and polishing are accomplished in the usual manner
with carbide finishing burs, fine diamonds, hand instruments, and discs. A completed Rochette-type bridge is
shown in Fig. 15-61, J and K, as viewed from the facial
and lingual aspects. When the bridge is complete, the
patient is instructed in how to use a floss threader and
dental floss to clean under the pontic and around the
abutment teeth. Another example of an anterior resinbonded bridge replacing both maxillary central incisors
is seen in Fig. 15-62.
Mandibular Anterior Splint-and-Bridge Combination. An indication for a conservative bridge that incor-

porates a splint design of the porcelain-fused-to-metal

framework is illustrated in Fig. 15-63. The mandibular
central incisors were extracted because of advanced periodontal disease. The weak lateral incisors are stabilized by including the canines in a splint-and-bridge
design. These teeth are caries free and have no restorations. An ill-fitting removable, partial denture was uncomfortable and did not support the adjacent teeth (see
Fig. 15-63, A and B).
The preparations for the splint-and-bridge combination
consist of removing approximately 0.3 mm of enamel on
the lingual aspect of the lateral incisors and canines (as
outlined on the laboratory cast) and preparing proximal
retention grooves (see Fig. 15-63, C. The perforated design of the winged retainers was the Rochette type for
ease of replacement or repair (see Fig. 15-63, D and E).
The splint bridge is bonded by the method previously de-

CHAPTER 1 5

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG. 15-64 Conservative mandibular posterior bridge with a combination metal and porcelain
pontic. (A, G, and H are mirror views.) A, Missing mandibular first molar with occlusion identified by marks from articulating paper. B, Study model surveyed and outlines of the preparation
marked with pencil. C, Preparation of axial surfaces with coarse, cylindric-diamond instrument.
D, Laboratory model with margins outlined. E, Completed bridge on cast ready for try-in. Note
centric contacts on metal to minimize wear of opposing teeth. F, Teeth cleaned, isolated, and
etched. G, Occlusal view of bonded bridge. H, Facial view of bonded bridge.

scribed (see Fig. 15-63, F and G). Note that the gingival
aspect of the pontic is free of tissue contact and has sufficient space for cleaning. A similar splint also can be
achieved with a Maryland bridge design.
Mandibular Posterior Bridge
Porcelain-Pontic. In Fig. 15-64, A,

with

Metal-and

a missing mandibular first molar needs to be replaced to maintain proper
occlusal contacts and to preserve the integrity of the
arch. A clinical examination with radiographs confirms
that the abutment teeth are in good alignment and are
sound and that the occlusion is favorable. Conservative
amalgam restorations have been inserted to correct occlusal fissures on the abutment teeth. Impressions and
a bite registration are made for study casts. An acidetched, resin-bonded, cast metal bridge (Maryland
type), including a porcelain pontic with metal, occlusal,
centric stops will provide for optimal occlusal wear resistance and an acceptable esthetic result.

Use a surveyor to determine the most favorable path
of draw, and mark the outline of the retainer area with a
pencil (see Fig. 15-64, B). The occlusal rest areas will provide rigidity and resistance form to vertical forces, and
the extensions on the facial and lingual surfaces will
provide a "wrap-around" design for added retention
and resistance against lateral forces. In this example the
teeth have sufficient crown length to avoid subgingival
margination.
Preparation. Prophylaxis, shade selection, and any
needed occlusal adjustment are accomplished before the
preparations are begun. As with the anterior teeth, some
preparation is necessary to provide "draw," to increase
retention and resistance forms, and to provide bulk to
the retainers for strength without overcontouring.
Preparation is minimal and involves only the enamel.
Using the surveyed penciled cast as a reference, prepare
the teeth with a coarse, tapered, rounded end diamond

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG. 15-65 A and B, Maryland-type, resinbonded posterior bridge. A missing mandibular right first molar is conservatively replaced by a porcelain-fused-to-metal, resinbonded bridge.

instrument (see Fig. 15-64, C). Prepare the occlusal rests
with a round diamond instrument. Make an elastomeric
impression and a bite registration for laboratory use.
Laboratory Phase. Include a sketch of the bridge design with the laboratory instructions. The nonperforated, etched metal design (Maryland) is specified in
this instance because the "wings" will be very thin and
other areas of the bridge will be inaccessible for placing
perforations. It is helpful to the technician if the margins
of the preparation are marked with an indelible pencil
(see Fig. 15-64, D). Before any glazing of porcelain or
polishing of framework or etching of metal, the bridge
is returned to the dentist for the try-in stage (see Fig.
15-64, E).
Try-In Stage. Seat the bridge and evaluate for proper
fit, occlusion, and color matching. After adjustments are
made, the bridge is returned to the laboratory for corrections, final glazing, polishing of the metal framework, and etching or other metal treatment procedures.
The etched metal must be examined under a microscope
to ensure that proper etching of the metal has occurred.
Bonding Steps. Care must be exercised in handling
the bridge, because the etched area can be easily contaminated. The bridge should not be tried in place (again) until the teeth are isolated and the enamel has been etched
(see Fig. 15-64, F). Rubber dam isolation is preferred
when bonding mandibular resin-bonded bridges. However, cotton roll isolation can be used with retraction
cords if a rubber dam cannot be placed. Being careful
not to touch or contaminate the etched metal, try-in the
bridge to verify fit and path of draw. Everything must
be "ready to go" as the manufacturer's instructions are
followed for mixing and applying the bonding materials to the teeth and the bridge. Again, the preparations
must be clean and dry to ensure proper bonding. Once
the bridge is in place a polyester strip is placed over the
pontic, and finger pressure is used to secure the bridge
until polymerization is complete. After removal of the
excess resin, the occlusion is evaluated. The occlusal
and facial views are esthetic with only the centric contacts in metal (see Fig. 15-64, G and H). Another example of a posterior, resin-bonded, Maryland-type bridge
is seen in Fig. 15-65.
Maxillary Bridge with Porcelain-Fused-to-Metal
Pontic. Fig. 15-66, A, illustrates a space resulting from

the extraction of a maxillary second premolar. As with

the mandibular bridge, resistance to lateral forces must
be provided by the design of the preparations and resulting prosthesis. However, because esthetics is more
critical in the maxillary arch, the wraparound design
used in the mandibular arch cannot be employed to as
great an extent, especially in the area adjacent to the facial aspect of the pontic. Therefore, proximal grooves
are prepared (in enamel) in the same occlusogingival
orientation as the path of draw to provide additional resistance form to lateral forces. The lingual extensions
and occlusal rests are prepared as described for the
mandibular bridge (see Fig. 15-66, B and C). For retention, perforations in the retainer (e.g., Rochette design)
are used in addition to acid-etching the preparations.
Perforations are placed in the accessible lingual extensions. This design aids in removing the bridge if replacement becomes necessary (see Fig. 15-66, D). The
etched preparations, which are ready for bonding, are illustrated in Fig. 15-66, E. The completed bonded bridge
is illustrated in Fig. 15-66, F.
Mandibular Posterior Bridge with Metal Pontic.

Fig. 15-67, A, illustrates a space between the mandibular
premolars resulting from extraction of the permanent
first molar at an early age and subsequent distal migration of the second premolar. Because esthetics was not a
factor, an all-metal bridge (e.g., Maryland type) with a
hygienically designed pontic was used. The steps are
identical to those previously described for the mandibular posterior bridge with a porcelain-fused-to-metal
pontic. The bridge is illustrated after several years of
service (see Fig. 15-67, B and C).
ALL-PORCELAIN PONTIC
Improvements in dental porcelains along with the capacity to etch and bond strongly to porcelain surfaces
have made all-porcelain pontics a viable alternative to
pontics with metal, "winged" retainers (e.g., Maryland
and Rochette bridges) 36 Although all-porcelain pontics
are not as strong as pontics with metal retainers, far
superior esthetic results can be achieved because no
metal substructure or framework is present. Moreover,
all-porcelain pontics often can be used when tooth
anatomy precludes or restricts the preparation and
placement of a metal, "winged" pontic. For example,
long, pointed canines with proximal surfaces exhibiting
little occlusogingival height often lack adequate areas

CHAPTER 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-66 Maxillary posterior resin-bonded bridge with porcelain-fused-to-metal pontic. A, Preoperative photograph (mirror view) of missing maxillary second premolar. Outlined final tooth
preparations: occlusal (B) and lingual (C) views. D, Completed prosthesis. E, Etched preparations
isolated and ready for bonding. F, Porcelain-fused-to-metal bridge bonded in place.

FIG 15-67 Resin-bonded mandibular posterior all-metal bridge. A, Edentulous space resulting
from loss of first molar and distal migration of second premolar. All-metal bridge with electrolytically etched retainers (Maryland type) bonded to place: occlusal view (B) and lingual view
( C). Note non-tissue-contacting, hygienic-type pontic. (Courtesy of Dr. William Sulik.)
for the placement of retention grooves. Anterior teeth
that are notably thin faciolingually also are not good
candidates for metal, resin-bonded bridge retainers, and
often are esthetic failures because of metal showing
through the tooth. In both instances, custom-fabricated,
etched porcelain pontics frequently can provide an esthetic, functional alternative.
All-porcelain pontics are particularly indicated for
placement in adolescents and young adults, in whom
virgin, unrestored teeth are often encountered. Because
the teeth are not extensively prepared, this procedure is
almost entirely reversible. This is a major benefit in
young patients where all-porcelain pontics can be
placed as interim restorations until implants or a more
permanent prosthesis can be done at an older age.
Again, because of their limited strength, all-porcelain
pontics should be considered provisional in nature, simi-

lar to the natural tooth pontic and the acrylic denture
tooth pontic.
Similar to the natural tooth and denture tooth pontics,
certain prerequisites must exist to ensure a successful
result. First, the abutment teeth must be in reasonably
good condition with proximal enamel surfaces that are intact or contain very small composite restorations. Second, the abutment teeth should be stable with little mobility present. If the abutment teeth are mobile, it is
frequently necessary to secure them as well by splinting
with composite to adjacent teeth before placement of the
bonded pontic (see Acid-Etched, Resin-Bonded Splints).
Third, the pontic must not be placed in a position that
will subject it to heavy centric or functional occlusal
contacts. Because of these occlusion concerns, canines
and posterior teeth are not usually good candidates for
these types of resin-bonded bridges.

CHAPTER

15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

FIG 15-68 All-porcelain pontics. A and B, Patient with congenitally missing lateral incisors. C and D, Right side before and after
treatment. E and F, Left side before and after
placement of all-porcelain pontic. G, Lingual
view of completed bridges. H, Facial view of
all-porcelain pontics.

Technique. Fig. 15-68, A and B, illustrates a typical
case of congenitally missing lateral incisors in which
tooth contours contraindicated the use of resin-retained
bridges with metal retainers. The central incisors are
very translucent and the mesial contours of the canines
are deficient (see Fig. 15-68, C and E). After assessing
centric and functional occlusion, it was determined that
all-porcelain pontics could be placed without subjecting
them to heavy occlusal forces. At the first appointment
the involved abutments are cleaned with flour of
pumice, and an accurate shade selection is made, noting
any desired color gradients or characterizations.
No preparation of the teeth is recommended unless
the proximal surfaces of the abutment teeth adjacent to
the edentulous space are markedly convex. In such
cases, slight flattening of the proximal surfaces with a
diamond instrument will facilitate closer adaptation of
the pontic to the abutment teeth; thereby increasing
strength of the connectors. Otherwise, no retentive features are recommended for preparation in the abutment
teeth; thus the connector areas will be entirely made of
composite.
Bridge connectors composed of porcelain are subject
to eventual fatigue fracture, after which repair is made
more difficult. Studies show, in particular, that "veneer
bridges" (i.e., all-porcelain pontics retained by adjacent

etched porcelain veneers) are the weakest design of all
and should be avoided . 36 These types of bridges not
only provide little bond strength to the pontic, but also
needlessly cover adjacent, healthy facial tooth surfaces.
All-porcelain pontics, which have connector areas consisting of the composite used for bonding to the abutment teeth, are much like extracted natural tooth pontics in this regard. This design feature allows for easy
repair and replacement of the composite connector
should a fracture in this area be encountered.
It should be noted that if high-strength ceramics are
developed that are totally immune to crack propagation
and cohesive fracture, retentive features prepared in
the adjacent abutment teeth may be desired. These
features, prepared in enamel, would consist of proximal
grooves or boxes, depending on the faciolingual dimension of the proximal surfaces. In the absence of totally
fracture-resistant ceramics, all-porcelain pontics are
best placed with composite connectors for ease of repair
and replacement.
An elastomeric impression is made from which a
working cast is generated. A modified ridge lap pontic
tip design as previously described (see Fig. 15-56, A) is
recommended. An occlusal bite registration should be
made and forwarded to the laboratory so that the occlusal relationship can be considered during fabrication

CHAPTER 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

of the all-porcelain pontic. Proximal surfaces of the pontics are etched with hydrofluoric acid. Note that the area
etched must include all areas anticipated for bonding to the
composite-bonding medium. The etched proximal surfaces

should extend just beyond the lingual line angles so that
additional composite can be placed in the lingual embrasure areas for additional connector strength.
At the next appointment, the teeth are isolated with
cotton rolls. A 2 x 2 inch (5 x 5 cm) cotton gauze is
placed across the back of the patient's mouth to act as a
protective shield should the pontic be inadvertently
dropped. A rubber dam is not recommended for this
procedure, because it precludes accurate assessment of
the adaptation of the pontic tip to the residual ridge.
Before the teeth dehydrate, the position of each pontic is tested in the edentulous space to assess the shade
and relationship of the pontic tip to the residual ridge.
The pontic tip should contact the residual ridge passively with no blanching of the underlying tissue evident. Spaces of approximately 0.3 to 0.5 mm should exist between the pontic and the abutment teeth, because
stronger connectors are provided by the additional bulk
of composite material. Care must be taken not to allow
contamination of the etched pontic from saliva to occur
during the try-in phase. If saliva contamination occurs,
the etched proximal surfaces of the pontic must be
cleaned thoroughly with alcohol and dried. Following
try-in, all etched proximal surfaces of the porcelain pontics are primed with a suitable silane-coupling agent
(see the manufacturer's instructions for the specific
technique). The pontics are now ready for bonding.
Next, the involved proximal enamel surfaces of the
abutment teeth are roughened with a coarse, flameshaped diamond instrument. Thereafter, all prepared
(i.e., roughened) enamel surfaces should be acid-etched,
rinsed, and dried. Care must be taken to maintain clean,
dry, uncontaminated etched surfaces until the pontic is
positioned and bonded. The abutment teeth are now
ready for bonding.
A light-cured composite is preferred for bonding allporcelain pontics, because the extended working time
allows the operator to initially contour the connectors
before polymerization. First, apply the bonding agent to
the etched surfaces of the porcelain pontic and the abutment teeth, and lightly blow with air to remove the excess. A 20-second application of light from the lightcuring unit is used to polymerize the bonding agent on
each etched surface.
A small amount of composite material is placed on
the proximal contact areas of the natural tooth pontic,
and the pontic is carefully inserted into the proper position in the edentulous space. A stent, or index, made
from bite registration material or fast-setting plaster can
be used to position the pontic, if desired. However,
positioning by hand is recommended so that optimal
gingival pressure can be maintained for best tissue

adaptation. Shape the excess composite extruding from
the connector areas around the contact areas with an explorer tip or small plugger end of a composite instrument. After final verification that the pontic position is
correct, polymerize the composite with light for a minimum of 40 to 60 seconds each from facial and lingual directions (for a total of 80 to 120 seconds).
Next, additional composite is applied in the proximal
areas (more material is added on the lingual surface
than on the facial surface), contoured, and polymerized.
Adequate gingival embrasures must be maintained to
facilitate flossing and ensure good gingival health. After
sufficient material has been added and polymerized,
shape and smooth the embrasure areas with carbide finishing burs, fine diamonds, and polishing discs. Facial
embrasures are defined for esthetics, but lingual embrasures are closed with composite to strengthen the connectors (see Fig. 15-68, D, F, and G).
Evaluate the occlusion centric contacts and functional
movements. Heavy contacts on the pontic or the connector areas must be adjusted. The finished bridges (immediately after bonding) are illustrated in Fig. 15-68, D
and F through H. As with all resin-bonded bridges, patients must be advised to avoid biting hard foods or objects to reduce the potential for dislodgement. Also, as
noted earlier, the patient must be advised as part of informed
consent that although the chances are remote, the potential for
dislodgement exists with the possibility of swallowing or aspirating the pontic. This possibility exists for all resin-

bonded bridges, and patients must be made aware of
this hazard even though the risk is minimal.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Portions of the section on artistic elements were reprinted with
permission from Heymann HO: The artistry of conservative esthetic dentistry, JAm Dent Assoc 115(12E, special issue):14, 1987.
REFERENCES
1. American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs:
Report on laser bleaching, J Am Dent Assoc 129(10):1484,
1998.
2. Andreasen JO: The effect of pulp extirpation or root canal
treatment on periodontal healing after replantation of permanent incisors in monkeys, J Endod 7:245, 1981.
3. Bayne SC, Taylor DF, Zardiackas LD: Biomaterials science,
Chapel Hill, NC, 1991, Brightstar.
4. Borissavlievitch M: The golden number, London, 1964, Alec
Tiranti.
5. Calamia JR: Etched porcelain facial veneers: a new treatment
modality based on scientific and clinical evidence, NY J Dent
53:255, 1983.
6. Carver CC, Heymann HO: Dental and oral discolorations
associated with minocycline and other tetracycline analogs,
J Esthet Dent 11(1):43, 1999.
7. Chiche GJ, Pinault A: Esthetics of anterior fixed prosthodontics,
Chicago, 1994, Quintessence.
8. Cooley RL, Burger KM, Chain MC: Evaluation of a 4-META
adhesive cement, J Esthet Dent 3(1):7, 1991.

CHAPTER 15

Additional Conservative Esthetic Procedures

9. Croll TP: Enamel microabrasion for removal of superficial
dysmineralization and decalcification defects, JAm Dent Assoc
120:411,1990.
10. Croll TP, Cavanaugh RR: Enamel color modification by controlled hydrochloric acid-pumice abrasion. Part 1: technique
and examples, Quintessence Int 17:81, 1986.
11. Dawson PE: Evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment of occlusal
problems, ed 2, St Louis, 1989, Mosby.
12. Feinman RA, Goldstein RE, Garber DA: Bleaching teeth,
Chicago, 1987, Quintessence.
13. Flynn M: Black teeth: a primitive method of caries prevention
in southeast Asia, JAm Dent Assoc 95(1):96, 1977.
14. Friedman MJ: The enamel ceramic alternative: porcelain
veneers vs. metal ceramic crowns, CDA J 20(8):27, 1992.
15. Goldstein RE: Esthetics in dentistry, Philadelphia, 1976, JB
Lippincott.
16. Graber TM, Vanarsdall RL: Orthodontics: Current principles and
techniques, ed 3, St Louis, 2000, Mosby.
17. Hall DA: Should etching be performed as a part of a vital
bleaching technique? Quintessence Int 22:679, 1991.
18. Hamada T, Shigeto N,Yanagihara T: A decade of progress for
the adhesive fixed partial denture, J Prosthet Dent 54(1):24,
1985.
19. Hansson O: The Silicoater technique for resin-bonded prostheses: clinical and laboratory procedures, Quintessence Int
20(2):85,1989.
20. Harrington GW, Natkin E: External resorption associated
with bleaching of pulpless teeth, J Endod 5(11):344, 1979.
21. Hattab FN et al: Dental discolorations: an overview, J Esthet
Dent 11(6):291, 1999.
22. Haywood VB: History, safety, and effectiveness of current
bleaching techniques and applications of the nightguard vital
bleaching technique, Quintessence Int 23:471, 1992.
23. Haywood VB: Nightguard vital bleaching: a history and products update: part 1, Esthetic Dent Update 2(4):63, 1991.
24. Haywood VB, Heymann HO: Nightguard vital bleaching:
how safe is it? Quintessence Int 22:515, 1991.
25. Haywood VB, Heymann HO: Nightguard vital bleaching,
Quintessence Int 20:173, 1989.
26. Haywood VB et al: Polishing porcelain veneers: an SEM and
specular reflectance analysis, Dent Mater 4:116, 1988.
27. Holmstrup G, Palm AM, Lambjerg-Hansen H: Bleaching of
discolored root-filled teeth, Ended Dent Traumatol 4:197,1988.

28. Lado EA: Bleaching of endodontically treated teeth: an update on cervical resorption, Gen Dent 36:500, 1988.
29. Lado EA, Stanley HR, Weisman MI: Cervical resorption in
bleached teeth, Oral Surg 55:78, 1983.
30. Levin El: Dental esthetics and the golden proportion, J Prosthet Dent 40(3):244, 1978.
31. Livaditis G: Cast metal resin-bonded retainers for posterior
tooth, J Am Dent Assoc 101:926, 1980.
32. Livaditis G, Thompson VP: Etched castings: an improved retentive mechanism for resin-bonded retainers, JProsthet Dent
47(l):52,1982.
33. Madison S, Walton R: Cervical root resorption following
bleaching of endodontically treated teeth, J Endod 16:570,
1990.
34. Matsumura H, Nakabayashi N: Adhesive 4-META/MMATBB opaque resin with poly(methyl methacrylate) -coated titanium dioxide, J Dent Res 67(1):29, 1988.
35. McCloskey RJ: A technique for removal of fluorosis stains,
J Am Dent Assoc 109:63, 1984.
36. Moore DL et al: Retentive strength of anterior etched porcelain bridges attached with composite resin: an in vitro comparison of attachment techniques, Quintessence Int 20(9):629,
1989.
37. Muia PJ: The four dimensional tooth color system, Chicago,
1982, Quintessence.
38. O'Riorden MW et al: Treatment of avulsed permanent teeth:
an update, JAm Dent Assoc 105(6):1028, 1982.
39. Rochette AL: Attachment of a splint to enamel of lower anterior teeth, JProsthet Dent 30(4):418, 1973.
40. Sorensen JA, Martinoff JT: Intracoronal reinforcement and
coronal coverage: a study of endodontically treated teeth,
J Prosthet Dent 51(4):780, 1984.
41. Sproull RC: Understanding color. In Goldstein RE: Esthetics
in dentistry, Philadelphia, 1976, JB Lippincott.
42. Stangel I, Nathanson D, Hsu CS: Shear strength of the composite bond to etched porcelain, J Dent Res 66:1460, 1987.
43. Swift EJ et al: Treatment of composite surfaces for indirect
bonding, Dent Mater 8:193, 1992.
44. Titley KC, Torneck CD, Ruse ND: The effect of carbamideperoxide gel on the shear bond strength of a microfill resin to
bovine enamel, J Dent Res 71(1):20, 1992.

I.

II.

III.

Amalgam, 653
A. History, 653
B. Current status, 653
C. Types of amalgam restorative materials, 653
1. Low-copper amalgam, 653
2. High-copper amalgam, 654
3. Spherical amalgam, 654
4. Admixed amalgam, 654
5. New amalgam alloys, 654
D. Important properties, 654
E. Amalgam restorations, 654
F. Uses, 655
G. Handling, 656
General considerations for amalgam
restorations, 656
A. Indications, 656
1. Occlusal factors, 656
2. Isolation factors, 656
3. Operator ability and commitment factors, 656
4. Clinical indications for direct amalgam
restorations, 656
B. Contraindications, 657
C. Advantages, 658
D. Disadvantages, 658
Clinical technique, 658
A. Initial clinical procedures, 658
1. Local anesthesia, 658
2. Isolation of the operating site, 658
3. Other preoperative considerations, 658

I V.

V.

VI.

B. Tooth preparation for amalgam restorations, 658
1. Requirements, 659
2. Principles, 659
3. Preparation designs, 664
C. Restorative technique for amalgam restorations, 664
1. Matrix placement, 664
2. Mixing (triturating) the amalgam
material, 665
3. Inserting the amalgam, 665
4. Carving the amalgam, 665
5. Finishing the amalgam restoration, 666
6. Repairing an amalgam restoration, 666
Common problems: causes and potential solutions, 667
A. Postoperative sensitivity, 667
B. Marginal voids, 667
C. Marginal ridge fractures, 667
D. Amalgam scrap and mercury collection and
disposal, 667
Controversial issues, 667
A. Amalgam restoration safety, 667
B. Spherical or admixed amalgam, 667
C. Bonded amalgam restorations, 667
D. Proximal retention locks, 668
Summary, 668

CHAPTER

AMALGAM
Dental amalgam is a metal-like restorative material
composed of a mixture of silver-tin-copper alloy and
mercury. The unset mixture is pressed (condensed) into
a specifically prepared undercut tooth form and contoured to restore the tooth's form and function. Once the
material hardens, the tooth is functional again, restored
with a silver-colored restoration (Fig. 16-1). Dental
amalgam is described in detail in Chapter 4. In this text,
dental amalgam is referred to as amalgam. Amalgam has
been the primary direct restorative material for over
150 years in the United States. It has been the subject of
intense research but has been found to be safe and
beneficial as a direct restorative material, and many
people have benefited from amalgam restorations,
which restore a tooth in a very economical manner. The
United States Public Health Service (USPHS) has stated,
"In fact, hundreds of millions of teeth have been retained that otherwise would have been sacrificed because restorative alternatives would have been too expensive for many people. " 10 Amalgam restorations also
can be bonded to tooth structure. When an amalgam
restoration is bonded, many of the benefits of bonding
accrue.
HISTORY
Amalgam was introduced to the United States in the
1830s. Initially, amalgam restorations were made by
dentists filing silver coins and mixing the filings with
mercury, creating a putty-like mass that was placed into
the defective tooth. As knowledge increased and research intensified, major advancements in the formulation and use of amalgam occurred. However, concerns
about mercury toxicity were expressed in many countries about the use of amalgam; concerns reached major
proportions in the early 1990s. The American Dental Association and the USPHS have issued many statements
expressing their support for the use and safety of amalgam as a restorative material.
CURRENT STATUS
Today, the popularity of amalgam as a direct restorative
material has decreased,'," in part because of concerns
(valid or not) about its safety and environmental effects
but primarily because of the recognized benefits and esthetics of composite as a restorative material. During the
past 20 years, the number of amalgam restorations has
decreased by approximately 60% in the United States.'
Concerns about the use of amalgam restorations relate
to poor esthetics, weakening of the tooth by removal of
more tooth structure, recurrent caries, and lack of adhesive bonding benefits (unless the amalgam restoration is
bonded).
Amalgam restorations are still well suited for restoring many defects in teeth. The ability to restore a tooth
in a reasonably simple and economical manner has re-

16

I ntroduction to Amalgam Restorations

FIG

16-1 Clinical example of an amalgam restoration.

sulted in the continued use of amalgam by many U.S.
dentists, even though most dentists have also increased
their use of composite. The most significant factor that
may eventually lead to an even greater reduction in
amalgam use in the United States will most likely be
concern about disposal of amalgam from the dental office. Increased attention to mercury contamination of
municipal water supplies has resulted in some communities passing regulations that have addressed this concern. Often these regulations have defined specific limits of allowable amounts of mercury that can be
discharged in wastewater, including that from dental offices. Monitoring mercury levels in wastewater and installing equipment that will reduce these levels can be
costly, although new filtration systems may prove relatively inexpensive.
Because of these environmental concerns about mercury contamination, the use of amalgam as a restorative
material in many countries has already decreased. Legislation restricting and, in some cases, phasing out the
use of amalgam has been implemented in Japan, Denmark, Canada, Sweden, and Germany.
Even with the concern about the disposal of mercury, this
textbook advocates the continued use of amalgam as a direct
restorative material. Research has demonstrated both the
safety of the material and the success of restorations made
from amalgam. While the scope of the clinical uses of amalgam
presented in this textbook will be narrower than in the past,
amalgam still is recognized as an excellent material for restoring many defects in teeth.

TYPES OF AMALGAM
RESTORATIVE MATERIALS
Specific information about amalgam is presented in
Chapter 4. For review purposes, the following types of
amalgam are presented.
Low-Copper Amalgam. Low-copper amalgams were
prominent before the early 1960s. When the setting reaction occurred, the material was subject to corrosion
because a tin-mercury phase (gamma-two) formed. This
corrosion led to rapid breakdown of the amalgam
restorations. Subsequent research for improving amalgam led to the development of high-copper amalgam

CHAPTER

16

I ntroduction to Amalgam Restorations

materials. Low-copper amalgams are used very little in
the United States.
High-Copper Amalgam. High-copper amalgams are
the materials predominantly used today in the United
States. In this textbook, unless otherwise specified, the term
amalgam refers to a high-copper dental amalgam. The increase in copper content to 12% or greater designates an
amalgam as a high-copper type. The advantage of the
added copper is that it preferentially reacts with the tin
and prohibits the formation of the more corrosive phase
(gamma-two) within the amalgam mass. This change in
composition reduces or eliminates possible deleterious
corrosion effects on the restoration. However, the reduction of the corrosion products reduces the formation of a
corrosion layer at the amalgam-tooth interface, the formation of which sometimes aids in sealing the restoration . These materials can provide satisfactory performance for more than 12 years.
High-copper materials
can be either spherical or admixed in composition.
Spherical Amalgam. A spherical amalgam contains
small, round alloy particles that are mixed with mercury
to form the mass that is placed into the tooth preparation. Because of the shape of the particles, the material
is condensed into the tooth preparation with little condensation pressure. This advantage is combined with its
high early strength 25 to provide a material that is well
suited for very large amalgam restorations, such as
complex amalgams or foundations.

Admixed Amalgam. An admixed amalgam contains
irregularly shaped and sized alloy particles, sometimes
combined with spherical shapes, which are mixed to
form the mass that is placed into the tooth preparation.
The irregular shape of many of the particles makes a
mass that requires more condensation pressure (which
many dentists prefer) and permits this heavier condensation pressure to assist in displacing matrix bands to
more easily generate proximal contacts.
New Amalgam Alloys. Because of the concern about
mercury toxicity, many new compositions of amalgam
are being promoted as mercury-free or low-mercury
amalgam restorative materials. Alloys with gallium or
indium or those using cold-welding techniques are presented as alternatives to mercury-containing amalgams.
Unfortunately, none of these new alloys show sufficient
promise to become a universal replacement for current
amalgam materials .21,22,26

I MPORTANT PROPERTIES
The linear coefficient of thermal expansion (LCTE) of
amalgam is 2.5 times greater than that of tooth structure, ', 28 yet it is closer than the LCTE of composite.'
While the compressive strength of high-copper amalgam is similar to tooth structure, the tensile strength is
lower
making amalgam restorations somewhat subject to fracture. Usually, high-copper amalgam fracture
is a bulk fracture, not a marginal fracture. All amalgams
are brittle and have low edge strength. Therefore the
amalgam material must have sufficient bulk (usually
1 to 2 mm, depending on the position within the tooth)
and a 90-degree or greater marginal configuration.
Creep and flow relate to the deformation of a material
under load over time. High-copper amalgams exhibit
amalgam
no clinically relevant creep or flow.Because
is metallic in structure, it is also a good thermal conductor. Therefore an amalgam restoration should not be
placed in close proximity to the pulpal tissues of the
tooth without the use of a liner and/or base between the
pulp and the amalgam.
AMALGAM RESTORATIONS

FIG

16-2 A and B, Diagrams of Class II amalgam tooth preparations illustrating uniform pulpal and axial wall depths, 90degree cavosurface margins, and convergence of walls and/or
prepared retention form.

Amalgam functions as a direct restorative material by
easily being inserted into a tooth preparation and, once
hardened, restoring the tooth to proper form and function. Amalgam restorations may be bonded or nonbonded.
Nonbonded amalgam restorations are still predominantly used, even though more bonded amalgam
restorations are now being done. Both nonbonded and
bonded amalgam restorations require a specific tooth
preparation form into which the amalgam material is
inserted (Fig. 16-2). The tooth preparation form must
not only remove the fault in the tooth and remove weakened tooth structure, but it also must be formed to allow
the amalgam material to function properly. The re-

C H A P T E R 16

I ntroduction to Amalgam Restorations

quired tooth preparation form must allow the amalgam
to: (1) possess a uniform specified minimum thickness
for strength, (2) produce a 90-degree amalgam angle
(butt joint form) at the margin, and (3) be mechanically
retained in the tooth. Without this preparation form, the
amalgam could possibly be dislodged or fracture. After
sealing the prepared tooth structure, mixing, inserting,
carving, and finishing the amalgam is relatively fast and
easy (Fig. 16-3, A). For these reasons, it is a very userfriendly material that is less technique- or operatorsensitive than composite.
The use of bonded amalgam restorations has increased steadily (see Fig. 16-3, B). The mechanism of
bonding an amalgam restoration is similar to that for
bonding a composite restoration in some aspects, but it
is different in others. For example, a bonded amalgam
restoration, done properly, seals the prepared tooth
structure and strengthens the remaining unprepared
tooth structure. However, the retention gained by bonding may be minimal 12,29; consequently, bonded amalgam
restorations still require the same tooth preparation retention form as nonbonded amalgam restorations. It
should also be noted that isolation requirements for a
bonded amalgam restoration are the same as for a composite restoration.
Another amalgam technique gaining popularity is the
use of light-cured adhesive as a sealer under the amalgam material (see Fig. 16-3, C). For this procedure, the
prepared tooth structure is etched and primed and adhesive placed and cured before insertion of the amalgam. (Usually a one-bottle sealer material that combines
the primer and adhesive is used.) This technique seals
the dentinal tubules very effectively3,20
USES
Because amalgam is not an esthetic restorative material,
it is no longer used much in areas where esthetics is critical. Because of the benefits of conservative bonded
composite restorations, amalgam is also not used as
much for the restoration of small defects on molars and
premolars. However, because of its strength and ease of
use, amalgam provides an excellent means for restoring
large defects24 in nonesthetic areas, especially if it can be
bonded. In fact, a recent review of almost 3500 four- and
five-surface amalgams revealed successful outcomes at
5 years for 72% of the four-surface and 65% of the fivesurface amalgams. This result compared somewhat favorably with the 5-year success rates for gold and porcelain crowns, which were 84% and 85% respectively.
Specific uses of amalgam as a direct restorative material
are covered in subsequent chapters. Generally amalgams can be used for the following clinical procedures:
1. Classes I, II, and V restorations (Fig. 16-4)
2. Foundations (Fig. 16-5)
3. Caries control restorations (see Figs. 3-49 and 3-50)

FIG . 16-3 Types of amalgam restorations. A, Conventional
amalgam restoration. B, Bonded amalgam (amalgam intermingled with adhesive resin). C, Sealed amalgam (adhesive
resin placed and cured before amalgam placement).

CHAPTER 16

FIG

I ntroduction to Amalgam Restorations

16-4 Amalgam restorations. A to C, Class I. D, Class II. E, Class V.

HANDLING
Because of the concern about mercury, amalgam
restorations require meticulous handling to avoid unnecessary mercury exposure to the environment, office,
personnel, or patient. Proper mercury hygiene procedures are described in Chapter 4 and in the subsequent
chapters on amalgam restorations.

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
FOR AMALGAM RESTORATIONS
The following sections summarize general considerations about all amalgam restorations. Information for
specific applications is presented in Chapters 17, 18, and
19. Because the typical direct restorative material decision is usually a choice between amalgam and composite, some of the following information involves a comparative analysis between these two materials.

I NDICATIONS
Occlusal Factors. Amalgam has somewhat greater
wear resistance than composite. It therefore may be
indicated in clinical situations that have heavy occlusal
functioning. It also may be more appropriate when a
restoration restores all of the occlusal contact for a tooth.
Isolation Factors. Unless an amalgam restoration is
to be bonded, the isolation of the operating area is less
critical than for a composite restoration. Minor contamination of an amalgam during the insertion procedure

may not have as adverse an effect on the final restoration as the same contamination would produce for a
composite restoration. However, if an amalgam restoration is to be bonded, the isolation needs are the same as
for composite.
Operator Ability and Commitment Factors. The
tooth preparation for an amalgam restoration is very exacting. It requires a specific form with uniform depths
and a precise marginal form. Many failures of amalgam
restorations may be related to inappropriate tooth
preparations. The insertion and finishing procedures for
amalgam are much easier than for composite. However,
if the amalgam restoration is to be bonded, the procedure is almost as demanding as that for a composite
restoration.
Clinical Indications for Direct Amalgam Restorations. Because of the factors already presented, amalgam is most appropriately considered for:
1. Moderate to large Class I and Class 11 restorations
(especially including those with heavy occlusion,
that cannot be isolated well, or that extend onto the
root surface) (see Fig. 16-4, A and B).
2. Class V restorations (including those that are not esthetically critical, cannot be well isolated, or are located entirely on the root surface) (see Fig. 16-4, C).
3. Temporary caries control restorations (including
those teeth that are badly broken down and require a

C H A P T E R 16

I ntroduction to Amalgam Restorations

FIG 16-5 Amalgam foundation. A, Defective restoration (defective amalgam, mesiolingual
fractured cusp, mesiofacial caries). B, Tooth preparation with secondary retention and bonding,
using pin and slot. C, Amalgam foundation placed. D, Tooth prepared for crown with amalgam
foundation.

subsequent assessment of pulpal health before a
definitive restoration) (see Chapter 3 and Figs. 3-49
and 3-50).
4. Foundations (including for badly broken-down teeth
that will require increased retention and resistance
form in anticipation of the subsequent placement of a
crown or metallic onlay) (see Fig. 16-5).

CONTRAINDICATIONS
There are few indications for the use of amalgam for
restorations in anterior teeth. Occasionally, a Class III
amalgam restoration may be done if isolation problems
exist. Likewise, in rare clinical situations, Class V amal-

gam restorations may be indicated in anterior areas
where esthetics is not important. While esthetics is subject to wide variations in personal interpretation, most
patients find the appearance of an amalgam restoration
objectionable when compared to a composite restoration.
Therefore the use of amalgam in more prominent esthetic
areas of the mouth is usually avoided. These areas include anterior teeth, premolars, and, in some patients,
molars. Because the tooth preparation for an amalgam is
larger than for a composite, most small to moderate defects in posterior teeth should be restored with composite
rather than amalgam. Use of composite in these situations results in conservation of tooth structure.

CHAPTER

16

I ntroduction to Amalgam Restorations

ADVANTAGES
Some of the advantages of amalgam restorations have
already been stated, but the following list presents the
primary reasons why amalgam restorations have been
used successfully for many years:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Ease of use
High tensile strength
Excellent wear resistance
Favorable long-term clinical research results
Lower cost than for composite restorations
Bonded amalgams have "bonding" benefits:
• Less microleakage
• Less interfacial staining
* Slightly increased strength of remaining tooth
structure
Minimal postoperative sensitivity
Some retention benefits
Esthetic benefit of sealing by not permitting the
amalgam to discolor the adjacent tooth structure

DISADVANTAGES
The primary disadvantages of amalgam restorations relate to esthetics and increased tooth structure removal
during tooth preparation. The following is a list of these
and other disadvantages of amalgam restorations:
1. Noninsulating
2. Nonesthetic
3. Less conservative (more removal of tooth structure
during tooth preparation)
4. Weakens tooth structure (unless bonded)
5. More technique sensitive if bonded
6. More difficult tooth preparation
7. Initial marginal leakage'

Isolation for amalgam restorations can be accomplished
with a rubber dam or cotton rolls, with or without a retraction cord. Refer to Chapter 11 for a discussion of isolation techniques for composite restorations, which are
the same for amalgam restorations.
Other Preoperative Considerations. A wedge
placed preoperatively in the gingival embrasure is useful when restoring a posterior proximal surface. This
step causes separation of the operated tooth from the
adjacent tooth and may help protect the rubber dam
and the interdental papilla.
Also, a preoperative assessment of the occlusion
should be made. This step should occur before rubber
dam placement and identify not only the occlusal contacts of the tooth to be restored, but also those contacts
on opposing and adjacent teeth. Knowing the preoperative location of occlusal contacts is important both in
planning the restoration outline form and in establishing the proper occlusal contacts on the restoration. Remembering the location of contacts on adjacent teeth
provides guidance in knowing when the restoration
contacts have been correctly adjusted and positioned.
For smaller amalgam restorations, it also is important
to visualize the anticipated extension of the tooth preparation preoperatively. Since the tooth preparation requires specific depths, extensions, and marginal forms,
the connection of the various parts of the tooth preparation should result in minimal tooth structure removal
(i.e., as little as is necessary), thus maintaining as much
strength of the cuspal and marginal ridge areas of the
tooth as possible (Fig. 16-6). Therefore the projected facial and lingual extensions of a proximal box should be
visualized before preparing the occlusal portion of the
tooth, thereby reducing the chance of overpreparing the
cuspal area while maintaining a butt joint form of the facial and/or lingual proximal margins.

CLINICAL TECHNIQUE
I NITIAL CLINICAL PROCEDURES

TOOTH PREPARATION
FOR AMALGAM RESTORATIONS

A complete examination, diagnosis, and treatment plan
must be finalized before the patient is scheduled for operative appointments (emergencies excepted). A brief
review of the chart (including medical factors), treatment plan, and radiographs should precede each
restorative procedure. At the beginning of each appointment, the dentist should also carefully examine the
operating site and assess the occlusion, particularly of
the tooth (teeth) scheduled for treatment.
Local Anesthesia. Local anesthesia may be advocated for many operative procedures (as cited in Chapter 10). Profound anesthesia contributes to a comfortable and uninterrupted operation and usually results in
a marked reduction in salivation. Because most amalgam tooth preparations are relatively more extensive,
local anesthesia usually is necessary.
Isolation of the Operating Site. Complete instructions for the control of moisture are given in Chapter 10.

Detailed descriptions of specific amalgam tooth preparations are presented in Chapters 6, 17, 18, and 19. As
discussed in Chapter 6, the stages and steps of tooth
preparation are very important for amalgam tooth
preparations.
For an amalgam restoration to be successful, numerous steps must be accomplished correctly. After an accurate diagnosis is made, a tooth preparation must be
created that not only removes the defect (e.g., caries, old
restorative material, malformed structure) but also
leaves the remaining tooth structure in as strong a state
as possible. Equally important is making the tooth
preparation form appropriate for the use of amalgam as
the restorative material. Because of amalgam's physical
properties, it must: (1) be placed into a tooth preparation that provides for a 90-degree or greater restoration
angle at the cavosurface margin (because of its limited
edge strength), (2) have a minimum thickness of 0.75 to

C H A P T E R 16

I ntroduction to Amalgam Restorations

2 mm (because of its lack of compressive strength), and
(3) be placed into a prepared undercut form in the tooth
in order to be mechanically retained (because of its lack
of bonding to the tooth). After an appropriate tooth
preparation, the success of the final restoration is dependent on proper insertion, carving, and finishing of
the amalgam material.
Requirements. As indicated previously, appropriate
tooth preparation for an amalgam restoration is dependent on both tooth and material factors. Those preparation features that relate specifically to the use of amalgam as the restorative material include the following
and are subsequently discussed in more detail:
1. 90-degree or greater amalgam margin (butt joint
form).
2. Adequate depth (thickness of amalgam).
3. Adequate mechanical retention form (undercut
form).
Principles. The basic principles of tooth preparation
must be followed for amalgam tooth preparations to ensure clinical success. The procedure is presented in two
stages, academically, to facilitate student understanding
of proper extension, form, and caries removal. The initial stage: (1) places the tooth preparation extension into
sound tooth structure at the marginal areas (not pulpally or axially), (2) extends the depth (pulpally and/or
axially) to a prescribed, uniform dimension, (3) provides an initial form that retains the amalgam in the
tooth, and (4) establishes the tooth preparation margins
in a form that results in a 90-degree amalgam margin
once the amalgam is inserted. The final stage of tooth
preparation removes any remaining defect (caries or old
restorative material) and incorporates any additional
preparation features (slots, pins, steps, amalgampins, or
bonding) to achieve appropriate retention and resistance form. Even if the amalgam restoration is to be
bonded, retention form must be provided by the features and shape of the tooth preparation. Amalgam
bonding is an adjunct to mechanical retention form, not
a substitute. As noted earlier, even if bonding an amalgam, adequate mechanical retention features still must
be incorporated into the preparation.
The following subsections briefly describe certain aspects of tooth preparation that pertain to all amalgam
restorations. The initial tooth preparation steps, although discussed separately, are performed at the same
ti me. Thus, extension, depth, tooth preparation wall
shape, and marginal configuration are accomplished
simultaneously.
Initial Tooth Preparation Depth. All initial depths of
a tooth preparation for amalgam relate to the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ), except in the following two instances: (1) when the occlusal enamel has been significantly worn thinner, and (2) when the preparation
extends onto the root surface. The initial depth pulpally

FIG
16-6 Preoperative visualization of tooth preparation extensions when caries is present gingival to the mesial proximal contact and in the central groove area. A, Rotated tooth.
B, Open proximal contact. C, Normal relationship.

will be 0.2 mm inside (internal to) the DEJ or 1.5 mm as
measured from the depth of the central groove (Fig.
16-7), whichever results in the greatest thickness of amalgam. The initial depth of the axial wall will be 0.2 mm
inside the DEJ when retention locks are not used and
0.5 mm inside the DEJ when retention locks are used (Fig.
16-8). The deeper extension allows placement of the retention locks without undermining marginal enamel.
However, axial depths on the root surface should be
0.75 to 1 mm deep, providing room for a retention
groove or cove while providing for adequate thickness
of the amalgam.
Outline Form. The initial extension of the tooth
preparation should be visualized preoperatively by estimating the extent of the defect, the preparation form requirements of the amalgam, and the need for adequate
access to place the amalgam into the tooth. Because of
the structure of enamel, enamel margins must be left in

660

C H A P T E R 16

I ntroduction to Amalgam Restorations

FIG 16-7 Pulpal floor depth. A, Pulpal depth measured from central groove. B, No. 245 bur dimensions. C, Guides to proper pulpal floor depth: (1) one half the length of the No. 245 bur, (2)
1.5 mm, and/or (3) 0.2 mm inside (internal to) the DEJ.

DEJ
Axial wall

A

B
FIG . 16-8 Axial wall depth. A, No retention locks needed, axi al depth 0.2 mm inside (internal to) DEJ. B, Retention locks
needed, axial depth 0.5 mm inside (internal to) DEJ.

a form of 90 degrees or greater. Otherwise, the enamel is
subject to fracture. For enamel strength, the marginal
enamel rods should be supported by sound dentin.
These requirements for enamel strength must be combined with marginal requirements for amalgam (90degree butt joint) when establishing the periphery of the
tooth preparation (see Fig. 17-48).
The preparation extension primarily is dictated by
the amount of caries, old restorative material, or defect
present. Adequate extension to provide access for the
tooth preparation, caries removal, matrix placement,
and amalgam insertion also must be considered. When
making the preparation extensions, every effort should
be made to preserve the strength of cusps and marginal
ridges. Therefore, when possible, the outline form
should be extended around cusps and avoid undermining the dentinal support of the marginal ridge
enamel.
When viewed from the occlusal, the facial and lingual proximal cavosurface margins of a Class II preparation should be 90 degrees (i.e., perpendicular to a
tangent drawn through the point of extension facially
and lingually [Fig. 16-9]). In most instances, the facial
and lingual proximal walls should be extended just
into the facial or lingual embrasure. This extension

CHAPTER

16

I ntroduction to Amalgam Restorations

FIG

16-10 Proximal box preparation clearance of adjacent
tooth. A, Occlusal view. B, Lingual view of a cross-section
through the central groove.

FIG

16-9 Proximal cavosurface margins. A, Facial and lingual
proximal cavosurface margins prepared at a right angle (90

degrees) to a tangent drawn through the point on the external
tooth surface. B, 90-degree proximal cavosurface margin produces 90-degree amalgam margin. C, 90-degree amalgam
margins.

provides adequate access for performing the preparation (with decreased potential to mar the adjacent
tooth), easier placement of the matrix band, and easier
condensation and carving of the amalgam. Such extension provides clearance between the cavosurface margin and the adjacent tooth (Fig. 16-10). For the more experienced operator, extending the proximal margins

beyond the proximal contact into the respective embrasure is not always necessary. Obviously the less the
outline form is extended, the more conservative is the
resulting preparation and the less tooth structure that
is removed.
Factors dictating outline form are presented in greater
detail in Chapter 6. They include caries, old restorative
material, inclusion of all the defect, proximal and/
or occlusal contact relationship, and need for convenience form.
Cavosurface Margin. Enamel must have a marginal
configuration of 90 degrees or greater (a right or obtuse
angle), while amalgam must have the same. If either
have marginal angles less than 90 degrees, they are subject to fracture, because both are brittle structures.
Preparation walls on vertical parts of the tooth (facial,
lingual, mesial, or distal) should result in 90-degree
enamel walls (representing a strong enamel margin; see
Fig. 16-9) that meet the inserted amalgam at a butt joint
(both enamel and amalgam having 90-degree margins).
Preparation walls on the occlusal surface should be prepared to provide 90 degree or greater amalgam margins
and usually have obtuse enamel margins (representing
the strongest enamel margin; see Fig. 16-11). The 90degree occlusal amalgam margin results from the amal-

CHAPTER 1 6

I ntroduction to Amalgam Restorations

A
A

B

B

FIG . 16-11 Occlusal cavosurface margins. A, Tooth preparation. B, Occlusal margin representing the strongest enamel
margin. a, Full-length enamel rods. b, Shorter enamel rods.

FIG . 16-12 Amalgam form at occlusal cavosurface margins.
A, Amalgam carved too deep resulting in acute angles a and b
and stress concentrations within the amalgam, both increasing
the potential for fracture. B, Amalgam carved with appropriate
anatomy, resulting in an amalgam margin close to 90 degrees,
even though the enamel cavosurface margin is obtuse.

gam carving in the central groove area being more
rounded (as depicted in Fig. 16-12).
Primary Retention Form. Retention form preparation features lock or retain the restorative material in
the tooth. For composite restorations, micromechanical
bonding provides most of the retention needed. However, for both nonbonded and bonded amalgam
restorations, the amalgam must be mechanically locked
inside the tooth. Amalgam retention form (Fig. 16-13) is
provided by: (1) mechanical locking of the inserted
amalgam into surface irregularities of the preparation
(even though the desired texture of the preparation
walls is smooth) to allow good adaptation of the amalgam to the tooth, (2) preparation of vertical walls (especially facial and lingual walls) that converge occlusally, (3) special retention features such as locks,
grooves, coves, slots, pins, steps, or amalgampins that
are placed during the final stage of tooth preparation,
and (4) bonding of the amalgam to the tooth (optional).
The first two of these are considered primary retention
form features and are provided by the orientation and
type of the preparation instrument. The remaining two
are secondary retention form features and are discussed in a subsequent section. An inverted cone car-

bide bur (No. 245) provides the desired wall shape and
texture (as seen in Fig. 16-7, B).
Primary Resistance Form. Resistance form preparation features help the restoration and tooth resist fracturing as a result of occlusal forces. Resistance features
that assist in preventing the tooth from fracturing include: (1) maintaining as much unprepared tooth structure as possible (preserving cusps and marginal ridges),
(2) having pulpal and gingival walls prepared perpendicular to occlusal forces, when possible, (3) having
rounded internal preparation angles, (4) removing unsupported or weakened tooth structure, (5) placing pins
into the tooth as part of the final stage of tooth preparation, and (6) bonding the amalgam in the tooth. The last
two of these are considered secondary resistance form
features and are discussed in a subsequent section. Resistance form features that assist in preventing the amalgam from fracturing include: (1) adequate thickness of
amalgam (1.5 to 2 mm in areas of occlusal contact and
0.75 mm in axial areas), (2) marginal amalgam of 90 degrees or greater, (3) boxlike preparation form, which provides uniform amalgam thickness, and (4) rounded axiopulpal line angles in Class II tooth preparations. Many
of these resistance form features can be achieved using

C H A P T E R 16

I ntroduction to Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 16-13 Typical amalgam tooth preparation retention form features. A and B, Occlusal convergence of prepared walls (primary retention form).
C, Retention lock in proximal box (secondary retention form).

the No. 245 bur, which is an inverted cone design with
rounded corners.
Convenience Form. Convenience form preparation
features are those that make the procedure easier or the
area more accessible. Convenience form may include
arbitrary extension of the outline form so marginal
form can be established, caries can be accessed for removal, matrix can be placed, and/or amalgam can be
inserted, carved, and finished. Convenience form features also may include extending the proximal margins
to provide clearance from the adjacent tooth and extension of other walls to provide greater access for caries
excavation.
For simplification in teaching, these steps in the tooth
preparation constitute what is referred to as the initial
stage of tooth preparation. While each step is an important
consideration, they are actually accomplished simultaneously. In academic institutions, assessing the tooth
preparation after the initial preparation stage provides
an opportunity to evaluate a student's knowledge and
ability to properly extend the preparation and establish
the proper depth. If the student were to excavate extensive caries before any evaluation, the attending faculty
would not know whether the prepared depths were be-

cause of appropriate excavation or inappropriate overcutting of the tooth. The following factors constitute the
final stage of tooth preparation.
Removal of Remaining Fault and Pulp Protection.
If caries or old restorative material remains after the initial preparation, it should only be located in the axial or
pulpal walls (the extension of the peripheral preparation margins should have already been to sound tooth
structure). Chapter 6 addresses: (1) when to leave or remove old restorative material, (2) how to remove remaining caries, and (3) what should be done to protect
the pulp. For most nonbonded amalgam restorations, a
sealer is placed on the prepared dentin before amalgam
insertion. The objective of the sealer is to occlude the
dentinal tubules. (Use of liners and bases under amalgam restorations is addressed in Chapters 4 and 6.)
Secondary Resistance and Retention Form. If it is
determined (from clinical judgment) that insufficient retention or resistance forms are present in the tooth
preparation, then additional preparation is indicated.
Many features that enhance retention form also enhance
resistance form. Such features include the placement of
grooves, locks, coves, pins, slots, or amalgampins. Bonding an amalgam also enhances retention and resistance

CHAPTER

FIG . 16-14

16

I ntroduction to Amalgam Restorations

Types of amalgam tooth preparations. A, Conventional. B, Box-only. C, Tunnel.

form, but it is not considered a substitute for mechanical
retention. Usually the larger the tooth preparation, the
greater the need for secondary resistance and retention
forms.
Final Procedures. After the previous steps are performed, the tooth preparation should be viewed from
all angles. Careful assessment should be made that all
caries has been removed, depths are proper, margins
provide for the correct amalgam and tooth preparation
angles, and the tooth is cleaned of any residual debris.
Preparation Designs. The typical tooth preparation
for amalgam is referred to as a conventional tooth preparation. Other types include box-only and tunnel preparations for amalgam restorations. Fig. 16-14 illustrates
the various preparation designs. Appropriate details of
specific tooth preparations are presented in subsequent
chapters.

RESTORATIVE TECHNIQUE
FOR AMALGAM RESTORATIONS
After the tooth preparation, the tooth must be readied
for insertion of the amalgam. If the amalgam is not to be
bonded, a sealer is placed on the prepared dentin. The
sealer may be either a coating material or a polymerized
resin adhesive (see Fig. 16-3). This step may occur before or after the matrix application. If the amalgam is to
be bonded, the etching, priming, and adhesive place-

ment procedures for the prepared tooth structure must
be timed to coincide with the insertion of the amalgam.
Therefore bonding an amalgam when using a matrix requires the etching, priming, and adhesive procedures to
occur after the matrix is applied. It is important that the
bonding adhesive be fluid and unset when the amalgam
condensation occurs. This allows for intermingling of
the resin with the amalgam particles during condensation, thus providing some mechanical retention between the restoration and the tooth via the set resin adhesive. Some adhesives also achieve chemical adhesion
with the amalgam.
Matrix Placement. A matrix primarily is used when
a proximal surface is to be restored. The objectives of a
matrix are to: (1) provide proper contact, (2) provide
proper contour, (3) confine the restorative material, and
(4) reduce the amount of excess material. For a matrix to
be effective, it should: (1) be easy to apply and remove,
(2) extend below the gingival margin, (3) extend above
the marginal ridge height, and (4) resist deformation
during material insertion. Chapters 17, 18, and 19 describe matrix placement for specific amalgam restorations and illustrate some of the types of matrices available. It should be noted that when bonding an amalgam
restoration, it might be necessary to coat the internal aspect of the matrix before its placement to prevent the
bonded material from sticking to the matrix material.

CHAPTER

In some clinical circumstances, a matrix may be necessary for Class I or Class V amalgam restorations. Examples of Class V matrices are shown in Chapter 18; examples of Class I matrices are shown in Chapter 17. It
should also be noted that matrix application might be
beneficial during tooth preparation to help protect the
adjacent tooth from being damaged. The matrix, when
used for this reason, would be placed on the adjacent
tooth (teeth).
Mixing (Triturating) the Amalgam Material. The
manufacturer's directions should be followed when
mixing the amalgam material. Both the speed and time
of mix are factors in the setting reaction of the material.
Alterations in either may cause changes in the properties of the inserted amalgam.
I nserting the Amalgam. Manipulating the amalgam
during insertion is described in Chapters 4, 17, 18, and
19. It is important to properly condense the material
into the tooth preparation. Lateral condensation (facially and lingually directed condensation) is very important in the proximal box portions of the preparation
to ensure confluence of the amalgam with the margins.
Spherical amalgam is more easily condensed than admixed (lathe-cut) amalgam, but some practitioners prefer the handling properties of the admixed type. Both
types are easily inserted.
As a general rule, smaller amalgam condensers are
used first. This allows the amalgam to be properly condensed into the internal line angles and secondary retention features. Subsequently, larger condensers are used.
As stated previously, if the amalgam is to be bonded,
the adhesive application and amalgam condensation
must occur simultaneously. This permits intermingling
of the resin (which also is bonding to the tooth structure) with the amalgam particles. When bonding an
amalgam restoration, usually the priming/ adhesive application for the prepared tooth structure is different
than that for a composite restoration. The product manufacturer's directions must be followed. It is very important that the amalgam condensation occur before the
adhesive polymerizes.
Once the amalgam is placed to slight excess with condensers, it should be pre-carve burnished with a large
egg-shaped burnisher to finalize the condensation, remove excess mercury, and initiate the carving process.
Carving the Amalgam. The amalgam material selected
for the restoration has a specific setting time. The insertion
(condensation) and carving of the material must occur before the material has hardened so much as to be noncarvable. Once pre-carve burnishing has been done, the remainder of the accessible restoration must be contoured to
achieve proper form and function. A nonbonded amalgam is relatively easy to carve. However, a bonded amalgam is more difficult because the excess polymerized adhesive resin accumulates at the margins and is harder to

16

I ntroduction to Amalgam Restorations

Discoid-cleiod

FIG 16-15 Carving occlusal margins.

remove. Care must be taken to prevent breaking out
chunks of amalgam when carving a bonded amalgam.
Specific details are presented in Chapters 17 and 19.
Occlusal Areas. A discoid-cleoid instrument is used
to carve the occlusal surface of an amalgam restoration.
The rounded end (discoid) is positioned on the unprepared enamel adjacent to the amalgam margin and
pulled parallel to the margin (Fig. 16-15). This removes
any excess at the margin while not allowing the marginal amalgam to be overcarved (too much removed).
The pointed end (cleoid) can be used to define the primary grooves, pits, and cuspal inclines. However, as
presented earlier, an amalgam restoration is not carved
with deep, acute grooves or pits because that may leave
the adjacent amalgam material more subject to fracture.
Once the pit and groove anatomy is initiated with the
cleoid end of the instrument, the instrument is switched
and the discoid end is used to smooth out the anatomic
form. Some semblance of pits and grooves is necessary,
however, to provide appropriate sluiceways for the escape of food from the occlusal table. Also it may be beneficial to be certain that the mesial and distal pits are
carved to be inferior to the marginal ridge height, thus
helping prevent food from being wedged into the occlusal embrasure. Having definite but rounded occlusal
anatomy also helps result in a 90-degree amalgam margin on the occlusal surface (see Fig. 16-12, B).
For large Class 11 or foundation restorations, the initial carving of the occlusal surface should be rapid, concentrating primarily on the marginal ridge height and
occlusal embrasure areas. These areas are developed
with an explorer tip or carving instrument by mimicking the adjacent tooth. The explorer tip is pulled along
the inside of the matrix band, creating the occlusal em-

CHAPTER

16

I ntroduction to Amalgam Restorations

brasure form. When viewed from the facial or lingual,
the embrasure form created should be identical to that
of the adjacent tooth, assuming the adjacent tooth has
appropriate contour. Likewise the height of the amalgam marginal ridge should be the same as that of the
adjacent tooth (see Figs. 17-94 and 17-103). If both of
these areas are developed properly, the potential for
fracture of the marginal ridge area of the restoration is
significantly reduced. Placing the initial carving emphasis on the occlusal areas for a large restoration permits
the operator to more quickly remove the matrix and
carve any extensive axial surfaces of the restoration, especially the interproximal areas. Some of these areas
may be relatively inaccessible and must be carved while
the amalgam material is still not fully set. The remaining carving or contouring necessary on the occlusal surface can be done later and, if the amalgam is too hardened to carve, may require the use of rotary instruments
in the handpiece.
Once the initial occlusal carving has occurred, the matrix is removed to provide access to the other areas of
the restoration that require carving. Details of matrix removal are described in subsequent chapters.
Facial/Lingual Areas. Most facial and lingual areas
are accessible and can be carved directly. A Hollenbeck
carver is useful in carving these areas. The base of the
amalgam knife (scaler 34/35) is also appropriate. For
cervical areas, it is important to remove any excess and
develop the proper contour of the restoration. Usually
the contour will be convex; therefore care in carving
this area is necessary. The convexity is developed by using both the occlusal and gingival unprepared tooth
structure as guides for initiating the carving (see Fig.
18-41). The marginal areas are then blended together,
resulting in the desired convexity and providing the
physiologic contour that promotes good gingival
health.
Proximal Embrasure Areas. The development of the
occlusal embrasure already has been described. The
amalgam knife (or scaler) is an excellent instrument for
removing proximal excess and developing proximal
contours and embrasures (see Figs.17-104 and 17-105).
The knife is positioned below the gingival margin and
excess is carefully shaved away. The knife is drawn occlusally to refine the proximal contour (below the contact) and the gingival embrasure form. The sharp tip of
the knife also is beneficial in developing the facial and
lingual embrasure forms. Care must be used to prevent
carving away any of the desired proximal contact. If the
amalgam is hardening, the amalgam knife must be used
to shave, rather than cut the excess away. If a cutting
motion is used, the possibility of breaking or chipping
the amalgam is increased.
Developing a proper proximal contour and contact is
very important for the physiologic health of the interproximal soft tissues. Likewise, developing a smooth

proximal junction between the tooth and the amalgam
is important. An amalgam overhang (excess of amalgam) can result in compromised gingival health. Voids
at the cavosurface margins can result in recurrent caries.
The proximal portion of the carved amalgam can be
evaluated by visual assessment (reflecting light into the
contact area to confirm a proximal contact) and placement of dental floss into the area. If dental floss is used,
it must be used judiciously, making sure that the contact
area is not inadvertently removed. A piece of floss can
be inserted through the contact and into the gingival
embrasure area by initially wrapping the floss around
the adjacent tooth and exerting pressure on that tooth
rather than the restored tooth while moving the floss
through the contact area. Once the floss is into the gingival embrasure area, it is wrapped around the restored
tooth and moved occlusally and gingivally to both determine whether excess exists and smooth the proximal
amalgam material. If excess material is felt along the
gingival margin, the amalgam knife should be used
again until a smooth margin is obtained.
Finishing the Amalgam Restoration. Once the carving is completed, the restoration is visualized from all
angles and an assessment of the thoroughness of the
carving is made. If a rubber dam was used, it is removed
and the occlusal relationship of the restoration is assessed. Knowing the preoperative occlusal relationship
of the restored and adjacent teeth is helpful in developing the appropriate contacts in the restoration; the tooth
should be restored to appropriate occlusal contacts. Initially, the patient should be instructed to close very
lightly, stopping when any contact is noted. At this point
the operator should visually assess the occlusion. If spacing is seen between the adjacent teeth and their opposing teeth, the area of premature occlusal contact on the
amalgam should be identified and relieved. Articulating
paper is used to more precisely adjust the contacts until
the proper occlusal relationship is generated. After the
occlusion is adjusted, the discoid-cleoid can be used to
smooth the accessible areas of the amalgam. A lightly
moistened cotton pellet held in the operative pliers can
be used to smooth the accessible parts of the restoration.
If the carving and smoothing is done properly, no subsequent polishing of the restoration is needed and good
long-term clinical performance will result.
Repairing an Amalgam Restoration. If an amalgam
restoration fractures during insertion, the defective
area must be reprepared as if it were a small restoration. Appropriate depth and retention form must be
generated, sometimes entirely within the existing amalgam restoration. If necessary, another matrix must be
placed. A new mix of amalgam can be condensed directly into the defect and will adhere to the amalgam already present if no intermediary material has been
placed between the two amalgams. Therefore the sealer
material can be placed on any exposed dentin, but it

C H A P T E R 16

should not be placed on the amalgam preparation
walls. If the amalgam has been bonded, carefully condition and apply adhesive to the exposed tooth structure in the preparation.

I ntroduction to Amalgam Restorations

• Removing matrix correctly after defining the marginal ridge and embrasure forms

AMALGAM SCRAP AND MERCURY
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL

COMMON PROBLEMS: CAUSES
AND POTENTIAL SOLUTIONS

Causes of amalgam scrap and mercury collection and
disposal problems include:

The following is a list of common problems associated
with amalgam restorations. It provides typical causes
and potential solutions. Subsequent technique chapters

• Careless handling
• Inappropriate collection technique

may refer back to these.
Potential solutions include:

POSTOPERATIVE SENSITIVITY
Causes of postoperative sensitivity include:
• Lack of adequate condensation, especially lateral condensation in the proximal boxes
• Lack of proper dentinal sealing with sealer or bonding system
Potential solutions include:
• Proper condensation technique
• Proper dentinal sealing technique

MARGINAL VOIDS

• Careful attention to proper collection and disposal
• Following the guidelines presented in Chapter 4

CONTROVERSIAL ISSUES
Because the practice of operative dentistry is dynamic,
constant changes are occurring. As new products and
techniques are developed, their effectiveness cannot be
assessed until appropriately designed research protocols have tested their worth. Many such developments
are occurring at any time, many of which do not have
the necessary documentation to prove their effectiveness, even though they receive very positive publicity.
Several examples of such controversies follow.

Causes of marginal voids include:

AMALGAM RESTORATION SAFETY
• Inadequate condensation
• Material pulling away or breaking from the marginal
area when carving bonded amalgam
Potential solutions include:
• Proper condensation technique
• Careful carving of marginal areas, especially bonded
amalgam restorations

MARGINAL RIDGE FRACTURES
Causes of marginal ridge fractures:
Axiopulpal line angle not rounded in Class II tooth
preparations
Marginal ridge left too high
Occlusal embrasure form incorrect
Improper removal of matrix
Overzealous carving
Potential solutions include:
Proper rounding of axiopulpal line angles in Class II
tooth preparations
Creating marginal ridge height correctly, with both
the adjacent tooth and occlusion
Creating an occlusal embrasure form that mirrors the
adjacent tooth

Chapter 4 specifically addresses this issue and presents
facts that indicate amalgam restorations are safe. Likewise, the USPHS has reported the safety of amalgam
restorations. Even recognizing these assessments, the
mercury contained in current amalgam restorations still
causes concerns, both legitimate and otherwise. Proper
handling of mercury in mixing the amalgam mass, removal of old amalgam restorations, and amalgam scrap
disposal are very important. Amalgam restorations
have provided many millions of patients the opportunity to have teeth restored in an efficient, physiologic,
and economic manner.

SPHERICAL OR ADMIXED AMALGAM
As presented earlier, both spherical and admixed amalgam types have beneficial qualities. Regardless of the
advantage of one type versus the other, the choice usually is made by the dentist's preference on the handling
characteristics of the material. Still, spherical materials
have advantages in providing higher earlier strength
and permitting the use of less pressure. Admixed materials, on the other hand, permit easier proximal contact
development because of higher condensation forces.

BONDED AMALGAM RESTORATIONS
Sealing the underlying, prepared tooth structure is beneficial for any type of restoration. For an amalgam restoration, this can be accomplished without actually bonding

C H A P T E R 16

I ntroduction to Amalgam Restorations

the amalgam to the tooth. Nonbonded amalgams can
have a sealed, prepared tooth structure through use of a
sealer material (such as Gluma Desensitizer) or a cured
resin adhesive placed before the amalgam insertion.
Bonded amalgams are indicated for large restorations
that require additional retention features or strengthening
of the remaining unprepared tooth structure. However,
the amount of increased retention gained from bonding
an amalgam is controversial. While recognizing some increase in retention is gained from bonding an amalgam,
this textbook endorses the use of typical secondary retention form preparation features (e.g., grooves, locks, pins,
slots) for large amalgam restorations that are bonded.
Small to moderate amalgam restorations do not require
bonding; in fact, many small to moderate restorations
would be better indicated for composite restorations.
PROXIMAL RETENTION LOCKS

The need for proximal retention locks for all Class II
amalgam tooth preparations is debatable. This textbook
endorses the use of proximal retention locks for large
amalgam restorations, while their use for smaller
restorations is not deemed necessary. However, because
correct placement of proximal retention locks is difficult, this book presents many illustrations of locks
placed in smaller restorations, primarily to promote the
operator gaining sufficient experience in their use.
SUMMARY

Amalgam is a very good restorative material. While
there are some concerns about its use, it is a safe and effective direct restorative material. A successful amalgam
restoration is still relatively easy to accomplish, and adherence to tooth preparation and material handling requirements will result in a successful restoration. Indications for the use of amalgam in posterior restorations
have decreased in this textbook, but this is not because
of problems with either amalgam as a material or as a
restoration; it is because of the recognized benefits of
bonded composite restorations.
REFERENCES
1. American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs:
Dental amalgam: update on safety concerns, J Am Dent Assoc
129:494-503, 1998.
2. Ben-Amar A, Cardash HS, Judes H: The sealing of the
tooth/amalgam interface by corrosion products, J Oral Rehab
22(2):101-104,1995.
3. Ben-Amar A et al: Long term sealing properties of Amalgambond under amalgam restorations, Amer J Dent 7(3):141143,1994.
4. Berry TG et al: Amalgam at the new millennium, J Am Dent
Assoc 129(11):1547-1556,1998.
5. Boyer DB, Roth L: Fracture resistance of teeth with bonded
amalgams, Amer J Dent 7(2):91-94, 1994.
6. Bryant RW: The strength of fifteen amalgam alloys, Austral
Dent J 24(4):244-252, 1979.

7. Bullard RH, Leinfelder KF, Russell CM: Effect of coefficient of
thermal expansion on microleakage, J Am Dent Assoc
116(7):871-874,1988.
8. Collins CJ, Bryant RW, Hedge KL: A clinical evaluation of
posterior composite resin restorations: 8-year findings, J Dent
26(4):311-317,1998.
9. Combe EC, Burke FJT, Douglas WH: Thermal properties. In
Combe EC, Burke FJT, Douglas WH, editors: Dental biomaterials, Boston, 1999, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
10. Corbin SB, Kohn WG: The benefits and risks of dental amalgam: current findings reviewed, JAm Dent Assoc 125:381-388,
1994.
11. Dunne SM, Gainsford ID, Wilson NH: Current materials and
techniques for direct restorations in posterior teeth: silver
amalgam: part 1, Internat Dent J 47(3):123-136, 1997.
12. Gorucu J, Tiritoglu M, Ozgunaltay G: Effects of preparation
designs and adhesive systems on retention of class II amalgam restorations, J Prosthet Dent 78(3):250-254, 1997.
13. Letzel H et al: The influence of the amalgam alloy on the survival of amalgam restorations: a secondary analysis of multiple controlled clinical trials, J Dent Res 76(1):1787-1798, 1997.
14. Liberman R et al: Long-term sealing properties of amalgam
restorations: an in vitro study, Dent Mater 5(3):168-170, 1989.
15. Mahler DB: The high-copper dental amalgam alloys, J Dent
Res 76(l):537-421,1997.
16. Mahler DB, Adey JD. Factors influencing the creep of dental
amalgam, J Dent Res 70(11):1394-1400, 1991.
17. Mair LH: Ten-year clinical assessment of three posterior resin
composites and two amalgams, Quintessence Int 29:483-490,
1998.
18. Martin JA, Bader JD: Five-year treatment outcomes for teeth
with large amalgams and crowns, Oper Dent 22:72-78, 1997.
19. Murray GA,Yates JL: Early compressive and diametral tensile
strengths of seventeen amalgam alloy systems, J Pedodontics
5(l):40-50,1980.
20. Olmez A, Ulusu T: Bond strength and clinical evaluation of a
new dentinal bonding agent to amalgam and resin composite, Quintessence Int 26(11):785-793, 1995.
21. Osborne JW: Photoelastic assessment of the expansion of
direct-placement gallium restorative alloys, Quintessence Int
30(3):185-191,1999.
22. Osborne JW, Summitt JB: Direct-placement gallium restorative alloy: a 3-year clinical evaluation, Quintessence Int
30(1):49-53, 1999.
23. Pilo R, Brosh T, Chweidan H: Cusp reinforcement by bonding
of amalgam restorations, J Dent 26(5-6):467-472, 1998.
24. Plasmans P, Creugers N, Mulder J: Long-term survival of extensive amalgam restorations, J Dent Res 77(3):453-460, 1998.
25. Suchatlampong C, Goto S, Ogura H: Early compressive
strength and phase-formation of dental amalgam, Dent Mater
14(2):143-151,1995.
26. Venugopalan R, Broome JC, Lucas LC: The effect of water
contamination on dimensional change and corrosion properties of a gallium alloy, Dent Mater 14(3):173-178, 1998.
27. Vrijhoef MM, Letzel H: Creep versus marginal fracture of
amalgam restorations, J Oral Rehab 13(4):299-303, 1986.
28. Williams PT, Hedge GL: Creep-fatigue as a possible cause of
dental amalgam margin failure, J Dent Res 64(3):470-475,1985.
29. Winkler MM et al: Comparison of retentiveness of amalgam
bonding gent types, Oper Dent 22(5):200-208, 1997.

I.

II.

I ntroduction to Classes I, II, and VI amalgam
restorations, 671
A. Pertinent material qualities and properties, 671
B. Indications, 671
C. Contraindications, 671
D. Advantages, 671
E. Disadvantages, 672
Clinical technique for Class I amalgam
restorations, 672
A. Conservative Class I amalgam restorations, 672
1. Initial clinical procedures, 672
2. Tooth preparation, 672
3. Restorative technique, 679
B. Extensive Class I amalgam restorations, 687
1. Initial clinical procedures, 687
2. Tooth preparation, 687
3. Restorative technique, 688
C. Class I occlusolingual amalgam restorations, 690
1. Initial clinical procedures, 690
2. Tooth preparation, 690
3. Restorative technique, 694
D. Class I occlusofacial amalgam restorations, 695

III.

I V.
V.

Class II amalgam restorations, 696
A. Initial clinical procedures, 696
B. Tooth preparation, 697
1. Class II amalgam restorations involving
only one proximal surface, 697
2. Class II amalgam restorations involving
both proximal surfaces, 714
C. Restorative technique, 717
1. Placing a sealer or adhesive system, 717
2. Placing a matrix, 718
3. Inserting and carving the amalgam, 730
4. Finishing and polishing the amalgam, 734
D. Quadrant dentistry, 735
Class VI amalgam restorations, 736
Summary, 737

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

I NTRODUCTION TO CLASSES I, II,
AND VI AMALGAM
RESTORATIONS
Amalgam is used for the restoration of carious or fractured posterior teeth and in the replacement of failed
restorations (see Chapter 16). If properly placed, an
amalgam restoration will provide many years of serCurrently, more posterior teeth are revice.
stored with amalgam than any other material. Understanding the physical properties of amalgam and the
principles of tooth preparation is necessary to produce
amalgam restorations that provide optimal service. The
success of amalgam restorations depends on many factors. Unfortunately, although improved techniques and
materials are available, amalgam failures occur. Much
clinical time is spent replacing restorations that fail as a
result of recurrent caries, marginal deterioration (i.e.,
ditching), fractures, or poor contours .52,53 However, attention to detail throughout the procedure can significantly decrease the incidence of failures and extend the
life of any restoration .
Many amalgam restorations
are also replaced because of improper diagnosis . 3 Careful evaluation of existing amalgams is important because they have the potential to provide long-term clinical service and should not be replaced unless an
accurate diagnosis is made.
This chapter presents the techniques and procedures
that affect the quality and longevity of Classes 1, 11, and
VI amalgam restorations (Fig. 17-1). Class I restorations
restore defects on the occlusal surface of posterior teeth,
the occlusal two thirds of the facial and lingual surface
of molars, and the lingual surfaces of maxillary anterior
teeth. Class 11 restorations restore defects that affect one
or both of the proximal surfaces of the posterior teeth.
Class VI restorations restore those rare defects affecting
the cusp tips of posterior teeth or the incisal edges of interior teeth.

Strength
Longevity
Ease of use
Clinically proven success
In addition, amalgam is the only restorative material with an interfacial seal that improves over
time.Amalgam may be used for almost any Class I,
II, or VI restoration, but its specific indications are presented in the following section. (See Chapter 16 for a
more detailed discussion of the pertinent material qualities and properties for amalgam.)

I NDICATIONS
The following is a list of clinical indications for amalgam restorations in Classes I, 11, and VI. Amalgam is indicated in:

•
•
•
•
•
•

Moderate-to-large restorations
Restorations that are not in highly esthetic areas of
the mouth
Restorations that have heavy occlusal contacts
Restorations that cannot be well isolated
Restorations that extend onto the root surface
Foundations
Abutment teeth for a removable partial denture
Temporary or caries control restorations

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Although amalgam has no specific contraindications for
use in Classes 1, 11, and VI restorations, the following is
a list of general contraindications that may be considered. Amalgam may be contraindicated in:
• Esthetically prominent areas of posterior teeth
• Small-to-moderate Classes I and II restorations that
can be well isolated
• Small Class VI restorations

PERTINENT MATERIAL QUALITIES
AND PROPERTIES

ADVANTAGES

Pertinent material qualities and properties for Classes I,
II, and VI amalgam restorations include:

The primary advantages are the ease of use and the
simplicity of the procedure. As noted in the following

FIG . 17-1 Clinical examples of Classes I, II, and VI amalgam restorations. A, Class I amalgam in
the occlusal surface of the first molar. B, Class II amalgams in a premolar and molar. C, Class
VI amalgams in premolars.

CHAPTER 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

sections, the placing and contouring of amalgam
restorations are generally easier than that for composite
restorations.'-' (The general advantages of amalgam
restorations were presented in Chapter 16.)
DISADVANTAGES
The primary disadvantages of using amalgam for
Classes I, II, and VI restorations are:
• More complex tooth preparation required for an
amalgam restoration compared to a composite
restoration
• Potential nonesthetic appearance
The general disadvantages of amalgam restorations
were presented in Chapter 16.)
CLINICAL TECHNIQUE FOR CLASS
I AMALGAM RESTORATIONS
As presented earlier, Class I refers to restorations on the
occlusal surfaces of posterior teeth, the occlusal two
thirds of facial and lingual surfaces of posterior teeth,
and the lingual surfaces of anterior teeth. Although
most small Class I restorations will be restored with a
composite restoration, amalgam is still indicated in
more extensive Class I restorations. This section describes the use of amalgam in both conservative and extensive Class I restorations.
CONSERVATIVE CLASS I AMALGAM
RESTORATIONS
Conservative tooth preparation is recommended to protect the pulp,24 preserve the strength of the tooth, and
reduce deterioration of the amalgam restoration .6,66 This
section describes conservative Class I tooth preparations for amalgam restorations. Although composite
may be the restorative material of choice for most small
Class I restorations, the following information describing the technique for a small, conservative Class I amalgam restoration is presented for several reasons. First,
amalgam can be and has been successfully used for
small Class I restorations. Second, the procedural description for a small, conservative Class I amalgam
restoration more clearly and simply presents the basic
information relating to the entire amalgam restoration
technique, including tooth preparation and placement
and contouring of the restoration. This basic procedural
information then can be more easily expanded to describe extensive Class I restorations, which are better indications for use of amalgam. The maxillary first
premolar is used for illustration in this section. Management of extensive occlusal caries and other Class I
amalgam restoration are presented later in this chapter.
I nitial Clinical Procedures. Generally, isolation of the
operating site with the rubber dam is recommended . 2
The rubber dam can be applied in the few minutes nec-

essary for onset of profound anesthesia before initiating
the tooth preparation. For a single maxillary tooth,
where caries is not extensive, adequate moisture control
may be achieved with cotton rolls and profound anesthesia. Rubber dam isolation is strongly recommended
when removing deep caries judged to be less than a millimeter from the pulp. Moisture control is also necessary
during amalgam condensation . 2 A preoperative assessment of the occlusal relationship of the involved and adj acent teeth is also necessary (see Chapter 10). (A more
detailed review of the initial procedures for direct
restorations, in general, and amalgam restorations,
specifically, is presented in Chapters 10 and 16.)
Tooth Preparation. This section describes the specific
technique for preparing the tooth for a conservative
Class I amalgam restoration. It is divided into initial and
final stages (see Chapter 6).
Initial Tooth Preparation. Initial tooth preparation is
defined as establishing the outline form by extension of
the external walls to sound tooth structure, while maintaining a specified, limited depth and providing resistance and retention forms (see Chapter 6).
The outline form for the Class I occlusal amalgam
tooth preparation should include only the faulty, defective occlusal pits and fissures (in a way that sharp angles in the marginal outline are avoided). Occasionally
the marginal outline for maxillary premolars is somewhat butterfly shaped, because of extension to include
the developmental fissures facially and lingually. The
ideal outline form for a very conservative amalgam
restoration (Fig. 17-2, A) incorporates the following resistance form principles that are basic to all amalgam
tooth preparations of occlusal surfaces. These principles allow the operator to position margins in areas that
are sound and subject to minimal forces, while conserving structure to maintain the strength and health of
the tooth.
Resistance principles include:
• Extending around the cusps to conserve tooth structure and prevent the internal line angles from approaching the pulp horns too closely
Keeping the facial and lingual margin extensions as
minimal as possible between the central groove and
the cusp tips
Extending the outline to include fissures, thereby
placing the margins on relatively smooth, sound
tooth structure
Minimally extending into the marginal ridges (only
enough to include the defect) without removing
dentinal support
• Eliminating a weak wall of enamel by joining two
outlines that come close together (i.e., less than 0.5
mm apart)
Extending the outline form to include enamel undermined by caries (in some bonded amalgam restora-

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG 17-2 Outline and entry. A, Ideal outline includes all occlusal pits and fissures. B, Dimensions of head of a No. 245 bur. C, No. 330 and No. 245 burs compared.
tions, weakened enamel may be strengthened by the
bonding process)
Using enameloplasty on the terminal ends of shallow
fissures to conserve tooth structure
Establishing an optimal, conservative depth of the
pulpal wall
A No. 245 bur with a head length of 3 mm and a tip
diameter of 0.8 mm or a smaller No. 330 bur is recommended to prepare the conservative Class I tooth preparation (see Fig. 17-2, B and C). The silhouette of the
No. 245 inverted cone bur reveals sides slightly convergent toward the shank (this produces an occlusal convergence of the facial and lingual preparation walls,
providing adequate retention form for the tooth preparation). The slightly rounded corners of the end of the
No. 245 bur produce slightly rounded internal line angles that render the tooth more resistant to fracture from
occlusal force."' The No. 330 bur is a smaller and pearshaped version of the No. 245 bur. It is indicated
for the most conservative amalgam preparations (see
Fig. 17-2, C).
Begin the Class I occlusal tooth preparation by entering the deepest or most carious pit with a punch cut using the No. 245 carbide bur at high speed with air-water
spray. A punch cut is performed by orienting the bur
so that its long axis parallels the long axis of the tooth
crown (Fig. 17-3, A and B), and then the bur is inserted
directly into the faulty pit. When the pits are equally
faulty, enter the distal pit as illustrated. Entering the distal pit first provides increased visibility for the mesial
extension. The bur should be positioned so that its distal aspect is directly over the distal pit, thereby minimizing extension into the marginal ridge (see Fig. 17-3, C).

The bur should be rotating when it is applied to the
tooth and should not stop rotating until it is removed
from the tooth. As the bur enters the pit, the proper
depth of 1.5 mm (one half the length of the cutting
portion of the bur) should be established. The 1.5 mm
pulpal depth is measured at the central fissure (see
Fig. 17-3, D and E). Depending of the cuspal incline, the
depth of the prepared external walls will be 1.5 to 2 mm
(see Fig. 17-3, D and E). The desired pulpal depth is usually 0.1 to 0.2 mm into dentin. The length of the blades
of an unfamiliar entry bur should be measured before it
is used as a depth gauge.
Distal extension into the distal marginal ridge to include a fissure or caries occasionally requires a slight
tilting of the bur distally (no more than 10 degrees). This
creates a slight occlusal divergence to the distal wall to
prevent undermining the marginal ridge of its dentin
support (Fig. 17-4, A through C). Because the facial and
lingual prepared walls will converge, this slight divergence does not present any retention form concerns. For
premolars, the distance from the margin of such an extension to the proximal surface usually should not be
less than 1.6 mm or two diameters of the end of the No.
245 bur (see Fig. 17-4, B) measured from a tangent to the
proximal surface (i.e., the proximal surface height of
contour). For molars, this minimal distance is 2 mm. A
minimal distal (or mesial) extension often does not require changing the orientation of the bur's axis from being parallel to the long axis of the tooth crown; thus the
mesial and distal walls will be parallel to the long axis
of the tooth crown (or slightly convergent occlusally).
While maintaining the bur's orientation and depth,
extend the preparation distofacially or distolingually to
include any fissures that radiate from the pit (see

CHAPTER

17

Classes

I , II,

and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 17-3 A, No. 245 bur oriented parallel
to long axis of tooth crown for entry as
viewed from lingual aspect. B, Bur positioned for entry as viewed from distal aspect. C, Bur positioned over more carious
pit (distal) for entry. Distal aspect of bur is
positioned over distal pit. D, Mesiodistal
l ongitudinal section. Relationship of head
of No. 245 bur to excised central fissure
and cavosurface margin at ideal pulpal
floor depth. E, Faciolingual longitudinal
section. The dotted line indicates long axis
of tooth and direction of bur.

Bur blade depth in
relation to central fissure
(1.5 mm, or 1/2 l ength
of bur head); in relation
to cavosurface margin
( may be 2 mm, or 2/3
l ength of bur head)

FIG. 17-4, D). Care should be taken not to undermine the
marginal ridge. However, when these fissures require
extensions of more than a few tenths of a millimeter,
consideration should be given to changing to a smaller
diameter bur, such as a No. 169L or No. 329, or to using
enameloplasty. Both of these approaches conserve tooth
structure and, hence, minimize weakening the tooth.
Continue to maintain the bur's orientation and depth
and, with intermittent pressure, extend along the central
fissure toward the mesial pit, following the DEJ. This
may create a flat pulpal floor. However, the pulpal floor
should follow the DEJ to maintain a more uniform pulpal floor depth (see Fig. 17-4, E). When the central fissure has minimal caries, one pass along the fissure at the
prescribed depth provides the desired minimal width to
the isthmus. Ideally the width of the isthmus need be no
more than the diameter of the bur. It has been demonstrated that an isthmus width of one fourth the distance

between the cusp tips does not reduce the strength of
the tooth."," As previously described for the distal margin, the orientation of the bur should not change as it
approaches the mesial pit if the mesial extension is minimal. If the fissure extends farther onto the marginal
ridge, the long axis of the bur should be changed to establish a slight occlusal divergence to the mesial wall if
the marginal ridge would be otherwise undermined of
its dentinal support. Fig. 17-5, A through C, illustrates
the correct and incorrect preparation of the mesial and
distal walls. It should be emphasized that minimal faciolingual width of the outline form and minimal occlusal
convergence of the facial and lingual walls is desired.
This is ideally achieved when the bur makes only one
pass along the central fissure.
The remainder of any occlusal enamel defects is
included in the outline, and the facial and lingual
walls are extended, if necessary, to remove enamel

C H A P T E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG 17-4 A, Enter pit with punch cut to a depth of 1.5 to 2 mm or one
half to two thirds the head length of bur. (The 1.5 mm depth is measured at central fissure; the measurement of same entry cut [but of
prepared external wall] is up to 2.0 mm.) B, Incline bur distally to establish proper occlusal divergence to distal wall to prevent removal of
dentin supporting marginal ridge enamel when pulpal floor is in dentin
and distal extension is necessary to include a fissure or caries. For
such an extension on premolars, the distance from margin to proximal
surface (i.e., imaginary projection) must not be less than 1.6 mm (i.e.,
two diameters of end of bur). C, Occlusal view of initial tooth preparation that has mesial and distal walls that diverge occlusally.
D, Distofacial and distolingual fissures that radiate from pit are included before extending along central fissure. E, Mesiodistal longitudinal section. Pulpal floors are generally flat but may follow the rise
and fall of occlusal surface.

Contact
area

B

C

FIG . 17-5 Direction of mesial and distal walls is influenced by remaining thickness of marginal
ridge as measured from mesial or distal margin (a) to proximal surface (i.e., imaginary projection of proximal surface) (b). A, Mesial and distal walls should converge occlusally when distance from a to b is greater than 1.6 mm. B, However, when operator judges that extension will
l eave only 1.6-mm thickness (two diameters of No. 245 bur) of marginal ridge (i.e., premolars)
as illustrated here and in Fig. 17-4, B and C, the mesial and distal walls must diverge occlusally
to conserve ridge-supporting dentin. C, Extending mesial or distal wall to two-diameter limit
without diverging wall occlusally will undermine marginal-ridge enamel.

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG 17-6 A and B, Ideal and strongest
enamel margin is formed by full-length
enamel rods (a) resting on sound
dentin supported on preparation side
by shorter rods, also resting on sound
dentin (b).

A

undermined by caries . The strongest and ideal
enamel margin should be made up of full-length
enamel rods resting on sound dentin, supported on
the preparation side by shorter rods, also resting on
sound dentin (Fig. 17-6).
The conservative Class I tooth preparation should
have an outline form with gently flowing curves and
distinct cavosurface margins. For the conservative Class
I preparation a faciolingual width of no more than 1 to
1.5 mm and a depth of 1.5 to 2 mm are considered ideal.
The pulpal floor, depending on the enamel thickness, is
usually in dentin (see Fig. 17-4, C). Such conservative
preparation saves tooth structure, minimizing pulpal irritation and leaving the remaining tooth crown as
strong as possible . Although conservation of tooth
structure is very important, convenience form requires
that the extent of the preparation provides adequate access and visibility.
This completes the initial tooth preparation for the
Class I amalgam tooth preparation. Extension should
ensure that all caries is removed from the peripheral
dentinoenamel junction (DEJ). For initial tooth preparation the pulpal floor should remain at the initial ideal
depth, even if restorative material or caries remains
(Fig. 17-7). The remaining caries (and usually the old
restorative material) will be removed during final tooth
preparation.
To summarize, primary resistance form is provided by:
Sufficient area or areas of relatively flat pulpal floor in
sound tooth structure to resist forces directed in the
long axis of the tooth and provide a strong, stable seat
for the restoration
Minimal extension of external walls, which reduces
weakening the tooth
Strong, ideal enamel margins (defined and illustrated
previously)
Sufficient depth (i.e., 1.5 mm) to result in adequate
thickness of the restoration, providing resistance to
fracture and wear

B

FIG 17-7 Mesiodistal longitudinal section showing example
when pulpal floor is in dentin and caries is exposed after initial tooth preparation. Note also that the carious lesion is surrounded by sound dentin on the pulpal floor for resistance
form.

The parallelism or slight occlusal convergence of two
or more opposing, external walls provides the primary
retention form.
Usually the No. 245 bur is used for extensions into the
mesiofacial and distofacial fissures. During such extensions the remaining length of the fissure can be viewed
in cross-section by looking at the wall being extended.
When the remaining fissure is no deeper than one quarter to one third the thickness of the enamel, enameloplasty is indicated. Enameloplasty refers to eliminating
the developmental fault by removing it with the side
of a flame-shaped diamond stone, leaving a smooth
surface (Fig. 17-8, A through C). This procedure frequently reduces the need for further extension into the
fissures with the No. 245 bur, thereby conserving tooth
structure. The extent to which enameloplasty should be
used cannot be determined exactly until the process of

C H A P T E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG 17-8 Enameloplasty. A, Developmental fault at terminal end of fissure. B, Fine-grit diamond stone in position to remove fault. C, Smooth surface after enameloplasty. D, Cavosurface
angle should not exceed 100 degrees, and marginal-amalgam angle should not be less than 80
degrees. Enamel external surface (e) before enameloplasty.
3. Include the fissure in a conservative Class 11 tooth
preparation.

FIG 17-9 Mesial fissure that cannot be eliminated by enameloplasty may be included in preparation if margins can be lingual of contact.
extending into the fissured area occurs, at which time
the depth of the fissure into the enamel can be observed.
The surface left by enameloplasty should meet the
tooth preparation wall, preferably with a cavosurface
angle no greater than approximately 100 degrees. This
would produce a distinct margin for amalgam of no less
than 80 degrees (see Fig. 17-8, D). During carving, amalgam should be removed from areas of enameloplasty.
Otherwise, thin amalgam left in these areas may fracture because of its low edge strength. Thus enameloplasty does not extend the outline form for amalgam
preparations.
If enameloplasty is unsuccessful in eliminating a
mesial (or distal) fissure that extends to the crest of a
marginal ridge or beyond, the operator has one of three
alternatives:
1. Make no further change in the outline form
2. Extend through the marginal ridge when margins
will be lingual to the contact (Fig. 17-9)

The first alternative usually should be strongly considered, except for patients at high risk for caries. Enameloplasty is not indicated if an area of centric contact is
involved. In this case, the choices are either to consider
the preparation completed (an option for patients at low
risk for caries) or to extend the preparation to include
the fissure as previously described.
Final Tooth Preparation. Final tooth preparation includes: (1) removal of remaining defective enamel and
infected dentin on the pulpal floor; (2) pulp protection,
where indicated; (3) procedures for finishing external
walls; and (4) final procedures of cleaning and inspecting the prepared tooth. The use of desensitizers or
bonding systems is considered the first step of the
restorative technique.
Remaining enamel pit-and-fissure in the pulpal floor
should be removed. If several enamel pit and fissure
remnants remain in the floor, or if a central fissure remnant extends over most of the floor, deepen the floor
with the No. 245 bur to eliminate the fault or faults or to
uncover the caries to a maximal-preparation depth of
2 mm (Fig. 17-10). If the pit-and-fissure remnants are few
and small, remove them with a suitably sized, round carbide bur (Fig. 17-11). Removal of the remaining infected
dentin (i.e., caries that extends pulpally from the established pulpal floor) is best accomplished using a discoidtype spoon excavator or a slowly revolving, round carbide bur of appropriate size (Fig. 17-12, A and B). Using
the largest instrument that fits the carious area is safest
because it is least likely to penetrate the tooth uncontrollably. When removing infected dentin, stop the excavation when tooth structure feels hard or firm (i.e., the
same feel as sound dentin). This often occurs before all
lightly stained or discolored dentin is removed . Ensure
that caries is removed from the peripheral DEJ where it

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG
17-10 Removal of enamel fissure extending over most of pulpal floor. A, Full-length occlusal fissure remnant remaining on pulpal floor after initial tooth preparation. B and C, Pulpal
floor is deepened to maximal depth of 2 mm to eliminate the fissure or uncover dentinal caries.

FIG . 17-11 Removal of enamel pit and fissure
and infected dentin that is limited to a few small
pit-and-fissure remnants. A, Two pit remnants remain on pulpal floor after initial tooth preparation. B, Defective enamel and infected dentin
have been removed.

FIG
17-12 Removal of dentinal caries is accomplished with round burs (A) or spoon excavators (B). C and D, Resistance form may be improved with flat floor peripheral to excavated area
or areas.

is less visible than on the pulpal floor. A caries-detecting
solution may be helpful in determining adequate excavation. A sharp explorer or hand instrument is more reliable than a rotating bur in judging the adequacy of removal of infected dentin. However, these instruments
should be used judiciously in areas of possible pulpal
exposure.

The removal of carious dentin should not further affect resistance form because the periphery will not need
further extension. In addition, it should not affect resistance form if the restoration will rest on a flat floor peripheral to the excavated area or areas. The flat floor
should be at the previously described initial pulpal floor
depth of 1.5 to 2 mm and in sound enamel or dentin (see

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 17-13 Base application. A, Inserting RIVIGI
with Williams periodontal probe. B, In moderately
deep excavations a base (b) thickness of 0.5 to
0.75 mm is indicated.

B

A

Fig. 17-12, C). If a flat seat cannot be established around
the entire circumference of the excavation or excavations, then an attempt could be made to establish flat
seats at this depth with the No. 245 bur equally spaced
around the periphery of the excavation to promote resistance form (see Fig. 17-12, D).
If the tooth preparation is of ideal or shallow depth,
no liner or base is indicated. In deeper carious excavations (where the remaining dentin thickness is judged to
be 0.5 to 1.0 mm),
place a thin layer (i.e., 0.5 to
0.75 mm) of a light-cured, resin-modified glass-ionomer
( RMGI) base. The RMGI base insulates the pulp from
thermal changes, bonds to the dentin, releases fluoride,
and is strong enough to resist the forces of condensation. 22, " The RMGI is picked up on the tip of a cementplacing instrument or blunt-tipped periodontal probe
and inserted in small increments. The RMGI should
flow when it is touched to the dentin surface. It should
be placed only over the deepest portion of the excavation. The entire dentin surface should not be covered
(Fig. 17-13). Dentin peripheral to the liner should be
available for bonding (if indicated) and for support of
the restoration . Use of liners and bases for even deeper
excavations will be presented in a later section.
The external walls have already been finished during
earlier steps in this conservative tooth preparation for
amalgam. An occlusal cavosurface bevel is contraindicated in the tooth preparation for an amalgam restoration. It is important to provide an approximate 90- to
100-degree cavosurface angle 25 which should result in
80- to 90-degree amalgam at the margins (see Fig. 17-21.f F).
This butt joint margin of enamel and amalgam is the
strongest for both. Amalgam is a brittle material with
low edge strength and tends to chip under occlusal
stress if its angle at the margins is less than 80 degrees.
Every completed tooth preparation should be inspected and cleaned before restoration. The tooth preparation should be free of debris after rinsing the tooth
with the air-water syringe. Disinfectants are available
for cleaning tooth preparations, but are usually considered unnecessary. A cotton pledget or commercially

available applicator tip moistened with water only is
generally used.
Other Conservative Class I Amalgam Preparations. Several other conservative Class I amalgam
preparations may be restored with composite, because
of their small size and the maximal thickness of enamel
available for bonding around their periphery. However,
these preparations could be restored with amalgam. The
preparations include:
The facial pit of the mandibular molar
The lingual pit of the maxillary molar
The occlusal pits of the mandibular first premolar
The occlusal pits and fissures of the maxillary first
molar
The occlusal pits and fissures of the mandibular second premolar
These preparations may be accomplished with a No.
245 bur or, if the lesion is very small, a No. 330 or 169L
bur may be used. Depending on the extent of the caries
and the angulation of the walls, retention grooves may
be added with a No. '/4 or 33 1/2 bur. Otherwise the techniques for these preparations are similar to those previously described. Examples of some of these types of preparations and restorations are illustrated in Figs. 17-14
to 17-19.
Restorative Technique

Placing a Sealer or Adhesive System. As stated previously, adhesives are not routinely used with conservative amalgam restorations. They are used more appropriately for larger restorations where bonding may increase
the resistance and retention forms. However, a dentin desensitizer is placed in the preparation before amalgam
condensation for nonbonded amalgam restorations
(Fig. 17-20). It is recommended instead of traditional varnish to better seal the prepared dentin. The dentin desensitizer is rubbed onto the prepared tooth surface for
30 seconds, dried, and then the amalgam is condensed
into place. Dentin desensitizer precipitates protein and
forms lamellar plugs in the dentinal tubules. 75 These

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG 17-14 Mandibular molar. A, Carious (or at risk for caries) facial pit. B, Position bur perpendicular to tooth surface for entry. C, Outline of restoration.

FIG 17-15 Carious (or at risk for caries) lingual pit and fissure
and restoration on maxillary lateral incisor.

FIG 17-16 Maxillary lateral incisor. A, Preoperative radiograph of dens in dente.
B, Radiograph of restoration after 13 years.
(Courtesy of Dr. Ludwig Scott.)

plugs are thought to be responsible for reducing dentin
permeability and sensitivity. Dentin may not be totally
sealed by a desensitizing agent, because no hybrid layer
is formed. Because these desensitizing agents represent
only a single component of an adhesive system (i.e.,
primers) the etching and adhesive steps of typical adhesive systems are omitted.

If amalgam adhesives are to be used, a separate desensitizing agent is usually unnecessary. Amalgam adhesives can increase the fracture resistance of the
restored tooth 64 and reduce microleakage. 5,47,63,76 However, no difference has been found between bonded and
nonbonded amalgam restorations in vivo after 1 to
In addition, there is concern about the long5 years .

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG
17-18 Maxillary first molar. A, Outline necessary to include mesial and central pits connected by fissure. B, Preparation outline extended from outline in (A) to include distal pit and
connecting deep fissure in oblique ridge. C, Preparation outline extended from outline in (B) to
i nclude distal oblique and lingual fissures.

FIG . 17-19 Mandibular second premolar. A, Typical occlusal
outline. B, Extension through lingual ridge enamel is necessary when enameloplasty does not eliminate lingual fissure.

term durability of the bonding resin13,49 and about
whether the bonding resin may interfere with the selfsealing capability of the amalgam.
The application of the amalgam adhesive requires
several steps: etching the preparation, rinsing, applying

the primer and adhesive, and immediately condensing
the amalgam, which permits the adhesive to interlock
mechanically with the amalgam. The specific technique
for use of amalgam adhesives is described later.
Placing a Matrix. Generally, matrices will not be necessary for a conservative Class I amalgam restoration
except as specified in later sections.
Inserting the Amalgam. To promote mercury hygiene and minimize mercury exposure in the dental office, precautions should be taken to protect the patient
and the dental staff." When removing an amalgam
restoration, a rubber dam should be in place and airwater spray and high-volume evacuation should be
used. Air-water spray and high-volume evacuation
should also be used when recontouring or polishing an
amalgam restoration. Goggles and disposable facemasks
should be worn to reduce hazards associated with flying
particles and the inhalation of amalgam dust. Reusable
amalgam capsules that allow mercury leakage during
trituration should not be used. Amalgamators that

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG 17-20 Use explorer tip, applicator tip, or microbrush to
apply the dentin desensitizer throughout tooth preparation.
completely enclose the arms and amalgam capsule during trituration should be used. Free mercury and amalgam scraps should be stored in an unbreakable, tightly
closed container away from any source of heat. Because
mercury vaporizes at room temperature, operatories
should be well ventilated to minimize the mercury level
in the air. An annual mercury assessment for personnel
regularly employed in the dental office is encouraged.
Disposal of scrap amalgam should be in accordance with
local and state environmental standards.
Select an alloy certified by the American Dental
Association (ADA). Because of its superior clinical
performance, high-copper amalgam is recommended.
Alloys are commercially available in powder, tablet, and
preproportioned forms. Most operators prefer disposable capsules for: (1) consistency of mix because the
alloy and mercury are preweighed and (2) their contribution to mercury hygiene. Preproportioned, disposable capsules are available in sizes ranging from 400 to
800 mg. Some precapsulated brands require activation
of the capsules before trituration. Amalgam should be
triturated (i.e., mixed) according to the manufacturer's
directions. It is often necessary to make several mixes to
complete the restoration, particularly for large preparations. Large tooth preparations often require two or
more capsules. Empty the triturated amalgam into a
Dappen dish or an amalgam well. It is not necessary to
squeeze excess mercury (using an amalgam cloth)
from the mix when using controlled mercury systems
(Fig. 17-21, A). Correctly mixed amalgam should not be
dry and crumbly. It will have a minimal, yet sufficient,
"wetness" to aid in achieving a homogeneous and welladapted restoration . 2
The principle objectives during insertion of amalgam
are to condense the amalgam to adapt it to the prepara-

tion walls and matrix and produce a restoration free of
voids and have as low as possible mercury content in
the restoration to improve strength and decrease corrosion. Condensation of amalgam that contains spherical
particles requires larger condensers than are commonly
used for admixed amalgam. Smaller condensers tend to
penetrate a mass of spherical amalgam, resulting in little or no effective force to compact or adapt the amalgam within the preparation. In contrast, smaller condensers are indicated for the initial increments of
admixed amalgam because it is more resistant to condensation pressure.
Before inserting the amalgam, review the outline of
the tooth preparation to form a mental image that will
aid later in carving the amalgam to the cavosurface margin and remembering the preoperative occlusal contact
locations (see Fig. 17-21, B). Use an amalgam carrier to
transfer amalgam to the tooth preparation. Increments
extruded from the carrier should be smaller (often only
half or less of a full-carrier tip) for a small preparation,
particularly during the initial insertion. Use a flat-faced,
circular or elliptic condenser to condense the amalgam
over the pulpal floor of the preparation. Be careful to
condense the amalgam into the pulpal line angles (see
Fig. 17-21, C). The initial condenser should be small
enough to condense into the line angles but large
enough not to "poke holes" in the amalgam mass. Usually a smaller condenser is used while filling the preparation and a larger one for overpacking. Thoroughly
condense each portion extruded from the carrier before
placing the next increment. Each condensed increment
should fill only one third to one half the preparation
depth. Each condensing stroke should overlap the previous condensing stroke to ensure that the entire mass is
well condensed. The condensation pressure required
will depend on the amalgam used and the diameter of
the condenser nib. Condensers with larger-diameter
nibs require greater condensation pressure. The preparation should be overpacked 1 mm or more using heavy
pressure (see Fig. 17-21, D). This will ensure that the
cavosurface margins are completely covered with wellcondensed amalgam. Final condensation over cavosurface margins should be done perpendicular to the external enamel surface adjacent to the margins.
Condensation of a mix should be completed within
the time specified by the manufacturer (usually 2 1/2 to
3 1/z minutes). Otherwise, crystallization of the unused
portion will be too advanced to react properly (i.e.,
chemically bond) with the condensed portion. Discard
the mix if it becomes dry, and quickly make another mix
to continue the insertion.
Precarve burnishing is a form of condensation. As
stated previously, tooth preparations should be overfilled
with amalgam. To ensure that the marginal amalgam is
well condensed before carving, the overpacked amalgam
should be burnished immediately with a large burnisher,

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG. 17-21 Restoration of occlusal tooth preparation. A, Properly triturated amalgam is a homogeneous mass with slightly reflective surface. It flattens slightly if dropped on a table top.
B, Operator should have a mental image of outline form of preparation before condensing
amalgam to aid in locating cavosurface margins during carving procedure. C, Amalgam should
be inserted incrementally and condensed with overlapping strokes. D, Tooth preparation should
be overpacked to ensure well-condensed marginal amalgam that is not mercury rich. E, Precarve burnishing with large burnisher is a form of condensation. F, Carver should rest partially
on external tooth surface adjacent to margins to prevent overcarving. G, Deep occlusal grooves
i nvite chipping of amalgam at margins. Thin portions of amalgam left on external surfaces soon
break away, giving the appearance that amalgam has grown out of preparation. H, Carve fossae slightly deeper than proximal marginal ridges.

using heavy strokes mesiodistally and faciolingually. To
maximize its effectiveness, the burnisher head should be
large enough that in the final strokes it will contact the
cusp slopes but not the margins (see Fig. 17-21, E). Precarve burnishing produces denser amalgam at the mar-

gins of occlusal preparations restored with high-copper
amalgam alloys and initiates carving. 4,46
Contouring and Finishing the Amalgam. With care,
carving may begin immediately after condensation.
Sharp discoid-cleoid instruments of suitable sizes are

CHAPTER 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG 17-22 A, Undercarved amalgam
with flash beyond the margins. Note that
restoration outline is irregular and larger
than preparation outline in Fig. 17-21, B.
B, Correctly carved amalgam restoration.

A

recommended carvers. Use the larger discoid-cleoid instrument (No. 3-6) first, followed by the smaller instrument (No. 4-5) in regions not accessible to the larger
instrument. All carving should be done with the edge
of the blade perpendicular to the margins as the instrument is moved parallel to the margins. Part of the
edge of the carving blade should rest on the unprepared tooth surface adjacent to the preparation margin
(see Fig. 17-21, F). Using this surface as a guide helps to
prevent overcarving the amalgam at the margins and
to produce a continuity of surface contour across the
margins.
Deep occlusal grooves should not be carved into the
restoration, because these may thin the amalgam at the
margins, invite chipping, and weaken the restoration
(see Fig. 17-21, G). Undercarving leaves thin portions of
amalgam (subject to fracture) on the unprepared tooth
surface. Such margins give the appearance that the
amalgam has expanded beyond the preparation. The
thin portion of amalgam extending beyond the margin
is referred to as flash. The mesial and distal fossae
should be carved slightly deeper than the proximal marginal ridges (see Fig. 17-21, H).
After carving, the outline of the amalgam margin
should reflect the contour and location of the prepared
cavosurface margin, revealing a regular (i.e., not ragged)
outline with gentle curves. It is important to recall the
mental image of the preparation outline form. An amalgam outline that is larger or irregular is undercarved and
requires further carving or finishing (Fig. 17-22). An
amalgam restoration that is more than minimally overcarved (i.e., a submarginal defect greater than 0.2 mm)
should be replaced .
If total carving time is short enough, the smoothness of the carved surface may be improved by wiping
with a small, damp ball of cotton held in the operating
pliers. All shavings from the carving procedure
should be removed from the mouth with the aid of the
oral evacuator.
Some operators prefer to postcarve burnish the amalgam surface using a small burnisher when carving is
completed. Postcarve burnishing is done by lightly rub-

B
bing the carved surface with a burnisher of suitable size
and shape to improve smoothness and produce a satin
(not shiny) appearance. Do not rub the surface hard
enough to produce grooves in the amalgam. With highcopper amalgams, postcarve burnishing may improve
the marginal integrity of high-copper amalgams 54 but it
is not recommended as a routine part of the procedure
(although it may also improve the smoothness of the
restoration).
Postcarve burnishing in conjunction with precarve
burnishing of low-copper amalgams may serve as a viable substitute for conventional polishing. 55 Postcarve
burnishing produces denser amalgam at the margins
of occlusal preparations restored with low-copper
amalgam .36
Next, the occlusion of the restoration must be evaluated. After completion of the carving and during the removal of rubber dam or cotton rolls, the patient is advised not to bite because of the danger of fracturing the
restoration, which is weak at this stage. Even if the carving has been carefully accomplished, the restoration occasionally will be "high," indicating a premature occlusal contact. Whenever possible, visually inspect the
contact potential of the restored tooth and assess the extent of closure. To ensure that the occlusion is correct,
place a piece of articulating paper over the restoration
and instruct the patient to close very lightly. If anesthesia is still present it may be difficult for the patient to tell
when the teeth are in contact. High spots will be
marked, which are then removed by additional carving.
The process of light closure with articulating paper is repeated, and additional carving is accomplished until the
patient can close the teeth to prerestoration occlusion.
While carving, establish stable centric-holding contacts
in correct locations (Fig. 17-23). These contacts should
be perpendicular to the direction of occlusal load where
possible. If the contact area is on an incline (not perpendicular to occlusal load), try, when carving away excess
amalgam, either to remove the undesirable portion of
the contact area (on an incline) or to carve a plateau perpendicular to the direction of load. Amalgam restorations carved out of occlusion may result in undesirable

C H A P T E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

B

FIG 17-23 Occluding the restoration. A, Heavy occlusal contacts on new amalgam should be
avoided. Articulating paper will mark heavy contacts as dark areas, and it will mark very heavy
contacts as dark areas with shiny centers. B, Amalgam should not be carved out of occlusion.
Rather, it should have light occlusal contact or contacts as indicated by faint markings.

tooth movement. Finally, caution the patient to protect
the restoration from any heavy biting pressure for
several hours.
Most amalgams do not require further finishing and polish-

However, these procedures are occasionally necessary to: (1) complete the carving; (2) refine the anatomy,
contours, and marginal integrity; and (3) enhance the
surface texture of the restoration. Additional finishing
and polishing procedures for amalgam restorations are
not attempted within 24 hours of insertion, because crystallization is not complete .2 If used, these procedures are
often delayed until all of the patient's amalgam restorations have been placed, rather than finishing and polishing periodically during the course of treatment. An
amalgam restoration is less prone to tarnish and corrosion if a smooth, homogeneous surface is achieved.
Polishing of high-copper amalgams is less important
than it is for low-copper amalgams, because
high-copper amalgams are less susceptible to tarnish
and marginal breakdown . 67,68
During carving the margins are located and the desired
contours and occlusion are developed. Finishing and polishing reduces the initial roughness of a carved restoration. These procedures must not leave the restoration undercontoured and must not alter the centric-holding
contacts. The final anatomy of the polished restoration
should be patterned after normal occlusal contours. After
polishing is completed, the tip of an explorer should pass
from the tooth surface to the restoration surface (and vice
versa) without jumping or catching. There should be a
ing.

continuity of contour across the margin, which is a requirement of all restorations.
Begin any necessary finishing procedure by marking
the occlusion with articulating paper and evaluating the
margins with an explorer. If the occlusion can be improved or there is not a continuity of surface contour
across the margins, a pointed, white, fused alumina
stone or a green carborundum stone is used to correct
the discrepancy (Fig. 17-24, A). The green stone is more
abrasive than the white stone; the tip of either stone
may be blunted on a diamond stone before use. This
will help to prevent marring the center of the restoration
while the margins are being adjusted. During surfacing of the amalgam, the stone's long axis is held at a
right angle to the margins. Guard against reducing any
centric-holding area. After the stone is used, the margins should be reevaluated with an explorer tine. If no
discrepancy is detected, the area may be further
smoothed using light pressure with a suitably shaped
round finishing bur (see Fig. 17-24, B). A large, round
finishing bur (comparable to a No. 4 or 6) is generally
used for this finishing step. If the groove and fossa features are not sufficiently defined, a small round finishing bur may also accentuate them without reducing the
centric-holding areas. The bur should be held perpendicular to the margin to allow the unprepared tooth
structure to guide the bur and prevent unnecessary removal of amalgam (see Fig. 17-24, C). A smooth surface
should be achieved before the polishing procedure is
initiated. The finishing bur should remove the scratches

C H A PT E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG 17-24 Polishing the amalgam. A, When necessary, use fine-grit alumina
or carborundum stone to develop continuity of surface from tooth to restoration. B, Surface the restoration with a round finishing bur. C, The stone's or
bur's long axis is held at a right angle to the margin. D, Initiate polishing with
coarse, rubber abrasive point at low speed. E, Point should produce smooth,
satiny appearance. F, Obtain high polish with medium- and fine-grit abrasive
points. G, Polished restoration.

from the green or white stone. However, often these
scratches can be removed with only the use of a rubber
abrasive point.
Initiate a polishing procedure by using a coarse, rubber abrasive point at low speed and air-water spray to
produce an amalgam surface with a smooth, satiny appearance (see Fig. 17-24, D and E). If the amalgam surface does not exhibit this appearance after only a few
seconds of polishing, the surface was too rough at the
start. In this instance, resurfacing with a finishing bur is
necessary, followed by the coarse, rubber abrasive point
to develop the satiny appearance. It is important that

the rubber points be used at low speed or "stall out"
speed for two reasons:
1. The danger of the point disintegrating at high speeds
2. The danger of elevating the temperature of the
restoration and the tooth
An excessive temperature rise (i.e., above 140° F [60° C])
can cause irreparable damage to the pulp or restoration or
both. When overheated, the surface of the amalgam will
appear cloudy even though it may have a high polish.
This cloudy appearance indicates that mercury has been

CHAPTER 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG

17-25 A, Existing amalgam restoration
exhibiting marginal deterioration and surface roughness. B, Same restoration after
finishing and polishing.

A
brought to the surface, which results in corrosion of the
amalgam and loss of strength.'
After polishing with the coarse, abrasive rubber
point, there should be no deep scratches on the amalgam surface, only the moderately polished surface left
by the rubber point. In addition, the contour from tooth
to restoration should be continuous when tested by the
explorer tip.
After the area is washed free of abrasive particles, a
high polish may be imparted to the restoration with a
series of medium- and fine-grit abrasive points (see
Fig. 17-24, F). As with the more abrasive points, the finer
abrasive points must be used at low speed. If a high luster does not appear within a few seconds, the restoration requires additional polishing with the more abrasive points. The system that is illustrated includes
coarse-, medium-, and fine-grit rubber abrasive points.
Using these points in sequence from coarse to fine will
produce an amalgam surface with a brilliant luster (see
Fig. 17-24, G). As an alternative to rubber abrasive
points, final polishing may be accomplished using a
rubber cup with flour of pumice followed by a highluster agent, such as precipitated chalk.
Polishing of older, existing restorations is infrequently indicated. However, finishing may be indicated
to improve the contour, margins, surface, or anatomy of
older, existing restorations (Fig. 17-25, A and B). Occlusal contours of amalgam restorations that have expanded beyond the cavosurface margins or that were
originally undercarved may be corrected with abrasive
stones and finishing burs. Margins exhibiting minimal
ditching may be refined and rough surfaces smoothed.
Round finishing burs may be used to correct poorly defined anatomy.
EXTENSIVE CLASS I AMALGAM
RESTORATIONS
Caries is considered extensive if the distance between
infected dentin and the pulp is judged to be less than
1 mm or when the faciolingual extent of the defect is up
the cuspal inclines. Obviously, extensive caries requires
a more extensive restoration (which is a more typical in-

B
dicated use for amalgam). The use of amalgam in large
Class I restorations provides good wear resistance and
occlusal contact relationships. For very large Class I
restorations, a bonding system may be used that improves both retention and resistance forms.
I nitial Clinical Procedures. The rubber dam should
be used for isolation of the operating site when caries is
extensive. If caries excavation exposes the pulp, pulp
capping may be more often successful if the site is isolated with a properly applied rubber dam. In addition,
the dam will prevent moisture contamination of the
amalgam mix during insertion.' Preoperative occlusal
assessment and anesthetic administration are also factors to consider (see Chapters 10 and 16).
Tooth Preparation
Initial Tooth Preparation. In teeth with extensive
caries, excavation of infected dentin and, if necessary,
insertion of a liner may precede the establishment of
outline, resistance, and retention forms. This approach
protects the pulp as early as possible from any additional insult of tooth preparation. Normally, however,
the procedure occurs as follows:
Using a No. 245 bur at high speed with air-water
spray and oriented with its long axis parallel to the long
axis of the tooth crown, prepare the outline, primary resistance, and primary retention forms. An initial depth
of 1.5 to 2 mm (measured 1.5 mm at any pit or fissure
and up to 2 mm on the prepared external walls) should
be maintained. The preparation is extended laterally to
remove all enamel undermined by caries by alternately
cutting and examining the lateral extension of the
caries. For caries extending up the cuspal inclines, it
may be necessary to alter the bur's long axis to prepare
a 90- to 100-degree cavosurface angle while maintaining
the initial depth (Fig. 17-26). If not, a significantly obtuse
cavosurface angle may remain (resulting in an acute, or
weak, amalgam margin), or the pulpal floor may be prepared too deeply.
When extending the outline form, enameloplasty
should be used when possible (as described previously). When the defect extends to one half the distance
between the primary groove and a cusp tip, capping the

C H A P T E R 11

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

cusp (i.e., reducing the cuspal tooth structure and
restoring it with amalgam) may be indicated. When that
distance is two thirds, cusp capping is usually required
because of the risk of cusp fracture postoperatively. A
Class I restoration that has either a wide faciolingual extension or a capped cusp may also be considered for adhesive bonding. Fig. 17-27 illustrates some examples of
large Class I amalgam preparation outlines.
Final Tooth Preparation. Removal of remaining infected dentin is accomplished in the same manner as described previously for the conservative preparation. If a
pulp exposure occurs, the operator must decide
whether to apply a direct pulp cap of calcium hydroxide
to the exposure or to treat the tooth endodontically. (For
factors influencing this decision, see Caries Control
Restoration in Chapter 3.)
For pulpal protection in very deep carious excavations (where the remaining dentin thickness is judged to
be less than 0.5 mm), a thin layer (i.e., 0.5 to 0.75 mm) of
a calcium hydroxide liner may be placed. The calcium
hydroxide liner may stimulate secondary dentin forma-

FIG 17-26 I nitial tooth preparation with extensive caries.
When extending laterally to remove enamel undermined by
caries, alter the bur's long axis to prepare a 90- to 100-degree
cavosurface angle. A 100-degree cavosurface angle on the
cuspal incline will result in an 80-degree marginal amalgam
angle.

f I C . 17-27 Examples of Class I amalgam tooth preparation outline forms.
A, Occlusal outline form in the
mandibular second premolar. B, Occlusolingual outline form in the maxillary first molar. C, Occlusofacial outli ne form in the mandibular first
molar.

tion in an area where a microexposure is suspected. If
used it is placed with the same instrument using the
same technique as described for the RMGI liner. The calcium hydroxide liner should be placed only over the
deepest portion of the excavation (nearest the pulp). A
thin base of RMGI should then be used to cover the calcium hydroxide. As before, the entire dentin surface
should not be covered (Fig. 17-28). Dentin peripheral to
the RMGI base should be available for bonding, if desired. The RMGI liner is recommended to cover the calcium hydroxide to resist the forces of condensation, to
avoid dissolution of the calcium hydroxide during acidetching, and to seal the deeply excavated area .22 Usually
no secondary resistance or retention form features are
necessary for extensive Class I amalgam preparations.
Primary resistance form was obtained by extending the
outline of the tooth preparation to include only undermined and defective tooth structure, while preparing
strong enamel walls and allowing strong cuspal areas to
remain. If the excavation of caries has removed most (or
all) of the flat pulpal floor that was initially prepared,
secondary resistance form may be indicated. If so, establish flat seats in dentin (0.2 mm inside the DEJ, at the
pulpal wall level) that are somewhat equally spaced
around the periphery of the excavation. Primary retention was obtained by the occlusal convergence of the
enamel walls; secondary retention form may result from
undercut areas that are occasionally left in dentin (and
that are not covered by a liner) after removal of infected
dentin. The external walls of the preparation are finished as described previously.
Restorative Technique. After any indicated liner or
base is placed, regardless of the depth of the excavation,
either a dentin desensitizer or adhesive system is used.
The objective of the use of a dentin desensitizer is to better seal the prepared dentin. As described previously, it
is used instead of varnish. It is rubbed into the dentin
surface with an applicator tip for 30 seconds and dried.
Light-curing is unnecessary.
Amalgam adhesives may be used with all amalgam
restorations, but they are generally reserved for foundations and large amalgam restorations, particularly those
with deep excavations, remaining weakened tooth structure, and capped cusps. Amalgam adhesives seal the
dentin with an acid-resistant layer of resin-reinforced
dentin called the hybrid layer. This is a multistepped pro-

CHAPTER

17

cedure that involves applying an etchant, primer, and
adhesive to the prepared tooth surface. For a given product, the etchant and primer (or primer and adhesive)
may be combined into a single component (i.e., bottle).
Therefore the specific technique of amalgam adhesion is
product specific and will involve two or more bottles.
Currently no self-curing, all-in-one adhesive is commercially available. To understand the action of each bonding component, the general technique for amalgam adhesives will be presented as a three-step procedure
(Fig. 17-29).

FIG . 17-28

Placement of Ca(OH) 2 liner and RMGI base.

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

When amalgam adhesives are used, varnish should
not be used and dentin desensitizers are usually unnecessary The adhesive itself serves as a desensitizer, reducing dentin permeability. Adhesives used with amalgam must be self-curing or dual curing, because it is
impossible to light-cure an adhesive through the amalgam. Use only adhesives recommended for amalgam
restorations by the manufacturer, and follow the technique instructions. The primer and adhesive components should not be dispensed in advance because the
primer will volatilize (especially those containing acetone solvents) and the adhesive will set (because most
are dual cured).
The preparation side of the matrix band should be
waxed (i.e., lubricated) before placement to ensure that
the bonded amalgam does not adhere to the band itself.
The band may be lubricated with inlay wax.
Generally the etchant is applied for 15 to 30 seconds to
enamel and dentin simultaneously and rinsed from the
tooth preparation (see Fig. 17-29, A). The preparation
should be only very briefly dried (i.e., about 1 sec), resulting in a moist dentin surface that is not visibly dry. The
dentin preparation surface should be "glistening" in appearance (see Fig. 17-29, B). As an alternative to drying,
the preparation may be blot dried with a damp cotton pellet. If the preparation is overdried, it may be rewetted
with water or with a HEMA and glutaraldehyde-based

FIG 17-29 Bonding technique. A, Etchant application. B, Moist preparation surface.
C, Primer application. D, Primed preparation surface. E, Adhesive application. F, Amalgam condensation. G, Carved restoration.

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

desensitizer on an applicator tip. The primer should be
applied using the technique described by the manufacturer (see Fig. 17-29, C). After primer application the
preparation surface should be dried but not rinsed. After
drying, the primed surface should be glossy in appearance. If it is not, the primer should be reapplied until the
surface is glossy (see Fig. 17-29, D). Separate applicators
should be used for the primer and adhesive components.
Before mixing base and catalyst from the adhesive, the
amalgam should be triturated and ready to be inserted in
the preparation. Base and catalyst from the adhesive are
mixed following the manufacturer's recommendations,
and the mixture is usually applied to the preparation with
an applicator tip or microbrush furnished by the manufacturer (see Fig. 17-29, E). The preparation should be
lightly coated with adhesive. Excess adhesive should be
removed with the applicator tip or microbrush (not with
the air syringe, which may remove adhesive from some
areas). Excess adhesive in the preparation encourages the
formation of "barnacles" of set resin at the cavosurface
margins (which will be discussed later in this section). After the adhesive is placed, amalgam should be condensed
into the preparation immediately to facilitate the intermingling of amalgam and unset resin. Immediate condensation of amalgam is also important to ensure that
amalgam adapts to the cavosurface margins and fills the
retentive grooves before the adhesive resin sets. It is difficult to condense amalgam quickly enough into adhesive
resin to avoid having a layer of resin at the margin that is
visible radiographically (Fig. 17-30). The long-term effect
of this radiographically visible resin interface is unknown.
If it remains intact, it may be an advantage; if it hydrolyzes, the preparation may be subject to recurrent
caries. The use of spherical amalgams is occasionally advocated with amalgam adhesives because they are more
quickly condensed than admixed amalgams.
The trituration of the amalgam material is as described previously. However, the timing of amalgam
condensation is critical if the restoration is being
bonded (i.e., if the insertion of the adhesive resin is immediately followed by the amalgam condensation). The
preparation is slightly overfilled and final condensation
is enhanced by use of precarve burnishing. Carving the

extensive Class I restoration is often more complex, because more cuspal inclines are included in the preparation. Appropriate contours, occlusal contacts, and
groove and fossa anatomy must be provided. Finishing
and polishing indication and techniques are as described previously.

CLASS I OCCLUSOLINGUAL AMALGAM
RESTORATIONS
Occlusolingual (OL) amalgam restorations may be used
on maxillary molars when a lingual fissure connects with
the distal oblique fissure and distal pit on the occlusal
surface (Fig. 17-31). Composite may also be used as the
restorative material, especially in smaller restorations.
I nitial Clinical Procedures. After local anesthesia
and evaluation of the occlusal contacts, the rubber dam
is generally recommended for isolation of the operating
(see Chapter 10). However, in most cases, typical Class I
preparations can be adequately isolated with cotton
rolls.
Tooth Preparation. The initial tooth preparation involves the establishment of the outline, primary resistance, primary retention forms, and initial preparation
depth. The accepted principles of outline form (previously presented) are to be observed with special attention to the following:
The tooth preparation should be no wider than necessary; ideally the mesiodistal width of the lingual
extension should not exceed 1 mm, except for extension necessary to remove carious or undermined
enamel or to include unusual fissuring.
When indicated, the tooth preparation should be cut
more at the expense of the oblique ridge rather than
centering over the fissure (weakening the small distolingual cusp).
Especially on smaller teeth, the occlusal portion may
have a slight distal tilt to conserve the dentin support
of the distal marginal ridge (Fig. 17-32).

FIG. 17-30

Radiograph showing bonding adhesive at gingival
margin (arrows).

FIG . 17-31

Outline of margins for OL tooth preparation.

CHAPTER

17

The margins should extend as little as possible onto
the oblique ridge, distolingual cusp, and distal marginal ridge.
These objectives help to conserve the dentinal support and strength of the tooth, and they aid in establish-

F I G . 17-32 Small distal inclination of bur on smaller teeth
may be indicated to conserve dentinal support and strength of
marginal ridge.

FIG

17-33 Enamel cavosurface angles of 90 to 100 degrees are ideal.

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

ing an enamel cavosurface angle as close as possible to
90 degrees (Fig. 17-33). They also help to minimize marginal deterioration of the restoration by locating the
margins away from enamel eminencies where occlusal
forces may be concentrated.
Using the mirror for indirect vision and the highspeed handpiece with air-water spray, enter the distal
pit with the end of the No. 245 bur (Fig. 17-34, A). The
long axis of the bur usually should be parallel to the
long axis of the tooth crown. Remember to conserve
the dentinal support and strength of the distal marginal
ridge and distolingual cusp, which may require directing the bur so that it cuts more of the tooth structure
mesial to the pit rather than distal (e.g., 70:30 rather
than 50:50). Penetrate to a depth of 1.5 to 2 mm as measured by the bur on the cut walls (1.5 mm at the fissure
and up to 2 mm on the external walls) (see Fig. 17-34,
B). At this depth the pulpal floor is usually in dentin.
Once the entry cut is made (see Fig. 17-34, C), move the
bur (maintaining the initial established depth) to include any remaining fissures facial to the point of entry
(see Fig. 17-34, D). However, remember to use enameloplasty, if indicated. Next, at the same depth, move
the bur along the fissure toward the lingual surface (see
Fig. 17-34, E). As with Class I occlusal preparations, a
slight distal inclination of the bur will occasionally be
indicated (e.g., smaller teeth) to conserve the dentinal
support and strength of the marginal ridge and the distolingual cusp. To ensure adequate strength for the marginal ridge, the distopulpal line angle should not approach the distal surface of the tooth closer than 2 mm.
On large molars the bur position should remain parallel

FIG 17-34 OL tooth preparation. A, No. 245 bur positioned for entry. B, Penetrate to minimal
depth of 1.5 to 2 mm. C, Entry cut. D, Remaining fissures facial to point of entry are removed
with same bur. E and F, Cut lingually along fissure until bur has extended the preparation onto
l i ngual surface.

C H A P T E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgarn Restorations

FIG 17-35 OL tooth preparation. A, Position of bur to cut lingual portion. B, Initial entry of bur
for cutting lingual portion. C, Alter inclination of bur to establish correct axial wall depth. D and
E, Direct bur perpendicular to axial wall to accentuate mesioaxial and distoaxial line angles.
F, Axial wall depth should be 0.2 to 0.5 mm inside the DEJ.

to the long axis of the tooth, particularly if the bur is offset slightly mesial to the center of the fissure. Keeping
the bur parallel to the long axis of the tooth creates a distal wall with slight occlusal convergence, providing favorable enamel and amalgam angles. Continue to move
the bur lingually along the fissure, maintaining a uniform depth until the bur has extended the preparation
onto the lingual surface (see Fig. 17-34, F). The pulpal
floor should follow the contour of the occlusal surface
and DEJ, which usually rises occlusally as the bur
moves lingually.
The mesial and distal walls of the occlusal portion of
the preparation should converge occlusally because of
the shape of the bur. This convergence provides sufficient retention form to the occlusal portion of the preparation. If the slight distal bur tilt was required, the
mesial and distal walls should still converge relative to
each other (although the distal wall may be divergent
occlusally, relative to the tooth's long axis). Thus occlusal retention form will usually be adequate.
Next, prepare the lingual portion. This may be accomplished by two techniques. In one technique the lingual surface is prepared with the bur's long axis parallel with the lingual surface (Fig. 17-35, A and B). The tip
of the bur should be located at the gingival extent of the
lingual fissure. Be careful to control the bur and not allow it to "roll out" onto the lingual surface, because this
could "round over" or damage the cavosurface margin.
Using the bur at high speed to prepare the lingual por-

tion usually prevents this occurrence. The facial inclination of the bur must be altered as the cutting progresses
to establish the axial wall of the lingual portion at a uniform depth of 0.5 mm inside the DEJ (see Fig. 17-35, C).
The axial wall should follow the contour of the lingual
surface of the tooth. An axial depth of 0.5 mm inside the
DEJ is indicated if retentive locks are required; an axial
depth of 0.2 inside the DEJ is permissible if retentive
locks are not required.
The No. 245 bur may be used with its long axis perpendicular to the axial wall to accentuate (i.e., refine) the
mesioaxial and distoaxial line angles. This will also result in the mesial and distal walls converging lingually
because of the shape of the bur (see Fig. 17-35, D and E).
During this step the axial wall depth is not altered (see
Fig. 17-35, F). The occlusal and lingual convergences
usually provide sufficient preparation retention form;
thus no retention locks are needed.
Keeping the bur perpendicular to the tooth surface,
round the axiopulpal line angle (Fig. 17-36). Leaving a
sharp line angle increases the possibility of fracture of
the amalgam because of stress concentration. It also
helps to ensure adequate preparation depth and amalgam thickness. Initial tooth preparation of the OL
preparation is now complete. As mentioned previously,
enameloplasty may be used to conserve tooth structure
and limit extension.
The second technique is more difficult. In this case,
the No. 245 bur is held perpendicular to the cusp ridge

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

A, Bur position for rounding axi opulpal line angle. B, Axiopulpal line angle
rounded.

FIG. 17-36

17-37
A, Remove any remaining
enamel pit and fissure and infected dentin on
established pulpal and axial walls. B, Completed tooth preparation.

FIG.

17-38 Secondary retention form. A,
Bur position for preparing lock in mesioaxi al line angle. B, Completed lock. C, Bur
position for retention cove in faciopulpal
l i ne angle. D, Completed cove.
FIG.

and lingual surface as it extends the preparation from
the occlusal surface gingivally (to include the entire
fault). This technique also results in opposing preparation walls that converge lingually. Initiate final tooth
preparation by removal of remaining caries on the pulpal and axial walls (Fig. 17-37, A and B) with a suitably
sized round bur, a discoid-type spoon excavator, or
both. Excavation of caries should not affect resistance
form if flat pulpal wall seats are present or prepared in
sound tooth structure peripheral to the excavated areas.
As described previously, if necessary, place a liner or
base or both in deep excavations for pulpal protection.
Additional retention in the lingual extension may be
required if the extension is wide mesiodistally or if it
was prepared without a lingual convergence. If additional retention is required, the No. 1/4 or 169 bur can be

used to prepare locks into the mesioaxial and distoaxial
line angles (Fig. 17-38, A). If these angles are in enamel,
the axial wall must be deepened to 0.5 mm axially of the
DEJ (because the locks must be in dentin to not undermine enamel). The depth of the locks at the gingival
floor is one half the diameter of the No. 1/4 bur. The cutting direction for each lock is the bisector of the respective line angle. The lock is slightly deeper pulpally than
the correctly positioned axial wall and is 0.2 mm pulpal
to the DEJ. The locks should diminish in depth toward
the occlusal surface, terminating midway along the axial wall (see Fig. 17-38, B). Test the adequacy of the lock
by inserting the tine of an explorer into the lock and
moving it lingually. The mesial or distal depth of the
lock should prevent the explorer from being withdrawn
directly to the lingual. (Refer to Secondary Resistance

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG 17-39 Matrix for OL tooth preparation. A, Matrix band secured to tooth with Tofflemire retainer. B, Positioning small strip of stainless steel matrix material between tooth and band already in place. C, Covering wedge with softened compound. D, Inserting wedge and compound. E, Compressing compound gingivally, which adapts steel strip to lingual surface.
F, Cross-section of tooth preparation and matrix construction.

and Retention Forms in this chapter for a description of
placing retentive locks in the proximal boxes of Class II
amalgam preparations; the techniques are similar.)
Extension of a facial occlusal fissure may have required a slight divergence occlusally to the facial wall to
conserve support of the facial ridge. If so and if deemed
necessary, the No. 33 1/, bur may be used to prepare a retention cove in the faciopulpal line angle (see Fig. 17-38,
C and D). The tip of the No. 245 bur held parallel to the
long axis of the tooth crown also might be used to prepare this cove. Be careful not to undermine the occlusal
enamel (this retentive cove is recommended only if occlusal convergence of the mesial and distal walls of the
occlusal portion is absent or inadequate). Finish the external walls as described previously, if necessary. Any
irregularities at the margins may indicate weak enamel
that may be smoothed by the side of the No. 245 bur rotating at slow speed.
Restorative Technique
Placing a Sealer or Adhesive System. As presented
previously, after any indicated liner or base or both is
placed, regardless of the depth of the excavation, either

a dentin desensitizer or dentin-bonding system is
placed. A desensitizer is usually indicated in conservative preparations. A dentin-bonding system may be indicated in more extensive preparations. Either is used
instead of varnish.
Placing a Matrix (if Necessary). Using a rigid matrix
to support the lingual portion of the restoration during
condensation is occasionally necessary. A matrix is helpful to prevent "land-sliding" during condensation and
to ensure marginal adaptation and strength of the
restoration. The Tofflemire matrix retainer is used to secure a matrix band to the tooth (as described later in this
chapter). Because this type of matrix band does not intimately adapt to the lingual groove area of the tooth (Fig.
17-39, A), an additional step may be necessary to provide a matrix that is rigid on the lingual portion of the
tooth preparation. If so, cut a piece of stainless steel matrix material (0.002 inch [0.05 mm] thick, 5/16 inch [8 mm]
wide) that will fit between the lingual surface of the
tooth and the band already in place (see Fig. 17-39, B).
Place the gingival edge of this segment of matrix material slightly gingival to the gingival edge of the band to

CHAPTER 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 17-39, cont'd G, Using explorer to remove excess amalgam adjacent to lingual matrix.
H, Carving completed. I, Polished restoration.

help secure the band segment. Break off approximately 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) of a round toothpick, while
holding it with the No. 110 pliers. Heat the end of a
stick of green compound and cover the end of the
tooth-pick wedge (see Fig. 17-39, C). Immediately insert the compound-coated wedge between the Tofflemire band and the cut piece of matrix material (see
Fig. 17-39, D). While the compound is still soft, use a
suitable burnisher to press the compound gingivally,
thereby securing the matrix tightly against the gingival cavosurface margin and the lingual surface of the
tooth to provide a rigid, lingual matrix (see Fig. 17-39, E
and F). A unique property of the lingual matrix is its
ability to respond to needed change in contour by
pressing a warmed, metal instrument against the band
from the preparation side. The heat is transferred
through the matrix material to the compound, which
may then be reshaped to provide the proper contour.
This matrix for the OL amalgam restoration is referred
to as the Barton matrix. Occasionally the piece of strip
matrix can be positioned appropriately by using only
the wedge (not the compound).
Inserting the Amalgam. Insertion of the amalgam is
accomplished as previously described for the Class I occlusal tooth preparation. Begin condensation at the gingival wall. If a matrix is not used, care must be taken to
ensure that "landsliding" of the amalgam does not occur because two adjoining surfaces of the tooth are being restored. For this technique, the last increments of
amalgam may be condensed on the lingual surface with
the side of a large condenser. Its long, broadly rounded
contour conforms to the rectangular shape for the lingual groove preparation. However, the operator must
still be careful (when condensing the occlusal surface)
not to fracture out the lingual amalgam. Another technique is to have the assistant secure the condensed lingual surface with a broad condenser nib while the operator completes the condensation of the occlusal surface.

Neither technique is as fail-safe as using a Barton matrix. Regardless of the technique used, the amalgam
must be well condensed.
Contouring and Finishing the Restoration. When
the preparation is sufficiently overfilled, carving of the
occlusal surface may begin immediately with a suitable
size, sharp discoid-cleoid instrument. All carving
should be done with the edge of the blade perpendicular to the margin and with the blade moving parallel to
the margin. To prevent overcarving, the blade edge
should be guided by the unprepared tooth surface adjacent to the margin. Use an explorer to remove excess
amalgam adjacent to the lingual matrix before matrix
removal (see Fig. 17-39, G). After the occlusal carving is
complete, loosen the Tofflemire retainer from the band
and remove the retainer with No. 110 pliers. Push the
free ends of the band one at a time, lingually and occlusally, through the proximal contacts. As the band is
freed from the tooth, the compound, wedge, and the cut
segment of steel matrix material may be lifted away
from the tooth. Complete the carving on the lingual
surface. Only slight excess should remain to carve
away. With carving completed (see Fig. 17-39, H), remove the rubber dam and adjust the restoration for
proper occlusion.
As stated previously, most amalgams do no require
finishing and polishing. However, the procedure is described in the section on Conservative Class I Amalgam
Restorations. Fig. 17-39, I, illustrates the polished OL
restoration.

CLASS I OCCLUSOFACIAL AMALGAM
RESTORATIONS
Occasionally mandibular molars exhibit fissures that extend from the occlusal surface through the facial cusp
ridge and onto the facial surface. Although these may be
restored with composite, restoration with amalgam is illustrated in Fig. 17-40.

CHAPTER 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 17-40 Fissure extension. A, Facial occlusal fissure continuous with fissure on facial surface (fissures carious or at risk for
caries). B, Extend through facial ridge onto facial surface. C, Appearance of tooth preparation following extension through ridge.
D, Facial surface portion of extension is cut with side of bur. E,
Sharpen line angles by directing bur from facial aspect.
F, Sharpening line angles from occlusal direction with No. 169L
bur. G, Ensuring retention form by preparing retention locks with
No. '/, round bur. H, Completed tooth preparation. I, Rubber poli shing point may be trued and blunted on a coarse diamond
wheel. J, Proper orientation of rubber point when polishing facial
surface groove area.

CLASS II AMALGAM
RESTORATIONS
Amalgam restorations that restore one or both of the
proximal surfaces of the tooth may provide years of service to the patient when the: (1) tooth preparation is correct, (2) matrix is suitable, (3) operating field is isolated,
and (4) restorative material is manipulated properly.
Inattention to these criteria may produce inferior
restorations prone to early failure. This section of the

chapter deals with the principles, techniques, and procedures necessary to produce quality Class II amalgam
restorations.
I NITIAL CLINICAL PROCEDURES
As stated previously, local anesthesia is usually required. It controls pain from the tooth and adjacent soft
tissues and usually reduces salivation, because the patient is less sensitive to stimulation of the oral tissues. In

C H A P T E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

addition, the operator is more relaxed and efficient
when the patient is comfortable (see Chapter 10.)
Occlusal contacts should be marked with articulating
paper before tooth preparation. The operator should
make a mental image of these contacts to serve as guide
in tooth preparation and restoration. Any opposing
"plunging cusp" or other pointed cusp may need to be
recontoured to reduce the risk of fracture of the new
restoration or the cusp from occlusal forces.
Before tooth preparation for amalgam, the placement
of the rubber dam is generally recommended. It is especially beneficial when the restoration is large, when the
caries is extensive, and when quadrant dentistry is practiced. The rubber dam can be applied in the time necessary for onset of profound anesthesia.
If the existing restoration has rough proximal contacts, the restoration may be removed before rubber
dam application. However, infected carious dentin
should be removed with the rubber dam in place, especially if a pulpal exposure is a possibility. Insertion of interproximal wedge or wedges is the last step in rubber
dam application when Class II tooth preparations are
scheduled. The wedges depress and protect the rubber
dam and underlying soft tissue, separate the teeth
slightly, and may serve as a guide to prevent gingival
overextension of proximal boxes (see Chapter 10.)
If necessary to prevent friction between the septal
dam and wedge during wedge insertion, stretch the
dam slightly away from the teeth (i.e., wedge insertion
side) and insert the wedge while slowly releasing the
dam. This results in a passive dam under the wedge and
tends to prevent bunching or tearing of the septal
dam during wedge insertion. (Refer to Placement of the
Rubber Dam, Step 22, in Chapter 10.)
TOOTH PREPARATION
Class II Amalgam Restorations Involving Only One
Proximal Surface. This section introduces the principles and techniques of a Class II tooth preparation for
an amalgam restoration involving a carious lesion on
one proximal surface. For illustration, a mesioocclusal
(MO) tooth preparation on a mandibular second premolar is presented. Although this restoration would
typically use composite as the restorative material, the
use of a small, conservative Class II amalgam restoration is presented to more clearly and simply provide the
basic concepts of Class II amalgam tooth preparation
and restoration.
Initial Tooth Preparation
Occlusal outline form (occlusal step). The occlusal
outline form of a Class II tooth preparation for amalgam
is similar to that for the Class I tooth preparation. Using
high speed with air-water spray, enter the pit nearest the
involved proximal surface with a punch cut using a
No. 245 bur oriented as illustrated in Fig. 17-41, A and B.
Entering the pit nearest the involved proximal surface

allows the mesial pit (in this case) not to be included if
it is sound. The bur should be rotating when applied to
the tooth and should not stop rotating until removed.
Viewed from the proximal and lingual (facial) aspects,
the long axis of the bur and the long axis of the tooth
crown should remain parallel during cutting procedures. Proper depth of the initial entry cut is 1.5 to 2 mm
(i.e., one half to two thirds the length of the cutting portion of a No. 245 bur), 1.5 mm as measured at the central
fissure, and approximately 2 mm on the prepared external walls. The operator should measure and be familiar
with each bur's dimensions to prevent being misled by
various bur sizes. This pulpal depth is usually 0.1 to 0.2
mm into the dentin. While maintaining the same depth
and bur orientation, move the bur to extend the outline
to include the central fissure and the opposite pit (the
distal pit in this example), if necessary (see Fig. 17-41, C
and D). For the very conservative preparation, the isthmus width should be as narrow as possible and no
wider than one quarter the intercuspal distance .
Ideally it should be the width of the No. 245 bur. Narrow restorations provide a greater length of clinical service. 6,65 Generally the amount of remaining tooth structure is more important to restoration longevity than the
restorative material used. The pulpal floor should be
prepared to a uniform (previously described) depth
(and is usually flat). However, the pulpal floor of the
preparation should follow the slight rise and fall of the
DEJ along the central fissure in teeth with prominent triangular ridges.
Maintaining the bur parallel to the long axis of the
tooth crown creates facial, lingual, and distal walls with
a slight occlusal convergence, which provides favorable
amalgam angles at the margins. It may be necessary to
tilt the bur to diverge occlusally at the distal wall if extension of the distal margin would undermine the marginal ridge of its dentinal support (see Fig. 17-4, B and Q.
During development of the distal pit area of the preparation, extension to include any distofacial and distolingual developmental fissures radiating from the pit may
be indicated. The distal pit area (in this example) provides dovetail retention form, which may prevent
mesial displacement of the completed restoration. A
dovetail feature is not required in the occlusal step of a
single proximal surface preparation unless a fissure emanating from an occlusal pit indicates it. However, without a dovetail the occlusal step should not be in a
straight direction, which may reduce retention form.
This type of retention form is also provided by any extension of the central fissure preparation that is not in a
straight direction from pit to pit (see Fig. 17-41, E). A
dovetail outline form in the distal pit is not required if
radiating fissures are not present . 69,85 Enameloplasty
should be used where indicated to conserve tooth structure (see the discussion of enameloplasty earlier in the
chapter).

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG. 17-41 Entry and occlusal step. A, Bur position for entry, as viewed proximally. Note slight lingual tilt of bur. B, Bur position as viewed lingually.
C, Enter tooth with punch cut and extend distally
along central fissure at uniform depth of 1.5 to
2 mm (1.5 mm at fissure; because of inclination of
unprepared tooth surface, corresponding measurement on prepared wall is greater). D, Occlusal
view of C. E, Completed occlusal step.

FIG 17-42 Visualize final location of proximoocclusal margins ( dotted lines) before preparing proximal box.
Before extending into the involved proximal marginal ridge

(the mesial ridge in this example), visualize the final location of the facial and lingual walls of the proximal box relative
to the contact area. This will prevent overextension of the

occlusal outline form (i.e., occlusal step) where it joins
the proximal outline form (i.e., proximal box). Fig. 17-42
illustrates visualization of the final location of proximoocclusal margins before preparing the proximal box.
Viewed from the occlusal, Fig. 17-43 illustrates a reverse
curve in the occlusal outline of a Class 11 preparation,
which often results when developing the mesiofacial
wall perpendicular to the enamel rod direction '4 and
conserving the facial cusp structure. (Note that the ex-

FIG

17-43 Reverse curve in occlusal outline is usually created
when mesiofacial enamel wall is parallel to enamel rod direction. Lingually, reverse curve is very slight, often unnecessary.
tension is sufficient only to permit 90-degree amalgam
at the mesiofacial margin and yet "curve" around the
mesial portion of the facial cusp). Lingually, the reverse
curve usually is minimal (if necessary at all) because the
embrasure form is larger.

C H A P T E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

While maintaining the established pulpal depth and
with the bur parallel to the long axis of the tooth crown,
extend the preparation mesially, stopping approximately 0.8 mm (the diameter of the end of the bur) short
of cutting through the marginal ridge into the contact
area. The occlusal step in this region is made slightly
wider faciolingually than in the Class I preparation because additional width is necessary for the proximal
box. However, the proper depth of the occlusal portion
of the preparation increases the strength of the restoration more than does faciolingual width (see Fig. 17-41, E,
for an illustration of the completed occlusal outline
form.) Although this extension includes part of the
mesial marginal ridge, it also exposes the marginalridge DEJ. The location of the DEJ is an important guide
in the development of the proximal preparation.
Proximal outline form (proximal box). Again visualize the desired final location of the facial and lingual
walls of the proximal box or proximal outline form relative to the contact area. The objectives for extension of
proximal margins are to:
Include all caries, faults, or existing restorative material.
Create 90-degree cavosurface margins (i.e., butt joint
margins).
Establish (ideally) not more than 0.5 mm clearance
with the adjacent proximal surface facially, lingually,
and gingivally.
The initial procedure in preparing the outline form of
the proximal box is the isolation of the proximal (i.e.,
mesial) enamel by the proximal ditch cut. This is a very
important procedure in conservative tooth preparation
and is, therefore, presented in much detail. With the
same orientation of the bur, position it over the DEJ in
the pulpal floor next to the remaining mesial marginal
ridge (Fig. 17-44, A). Allow the end of the bur to cut a
ditch gingivally along the exposed DEJ, two thirds at
the expense of dentin and one third at the expense of
enamel. The 0.8-mm diameter bur end will cut approximately 0.5 to 0.6 mm into dentin and 0.2 to 0.3 mm into
enamel. Pressure is directed gingivally and lightly toward the mesial surface to keep the bur against the
proximal enamel, while the bur is moved facially and
lingually along the DEJ. Extend the ditch gingivally just
beyond the caries or the proximal contact, whichever is
greater (see Fig. 17-44, B). Because dentin is softer and
cuts more easily than enamel, the bur should be cutting
away the dentin immediately supporting the enamel.
The harder enamel acts to guide the bur, thus creating
an axial wall that follows the faciolingual contour of the
proximal surface and the DEJ (see Fig. 17-44, D).
As a guide for the facial and lingual extension of the
ditch, visualize the completed mesiofacial and mesiolingual margins as right-angle projections of the facial and
lingual limits of the ditch (see Fig. 17-44, E). When

preparing a tooth with a small lesion, these margins
should clear the adjacent tooth by only 0.2 to 0.3 mm.
A guide for the gingival extension is the visualization
that the finished gingival margin will be only slightly
gingival to the gingival limit of the ditch. This margin
should clear the adjacent tooth by only 0.5 mm in a
small tooth preparation (see Fig. 17-44, F)." Clearance of
the proximal margins (i.e., mesiofacial, mesiolingual,
gingival) greater than 0.5 mm is excessive unless indicated to include caries, undermined enamel, or existing
restorative material (see Fig. 17-106 for conservative extension of proximal margins). The location of final proxi mal margins (i.e., facial, lingual, gingival) should be established with hand instruments (i.e., chisels, hatchets,
trimmers) in conservative proximal box preparations.
Otherwise, these margins may be overextended to
achieve 90-degree cavosurface margins with the No. 245
bur (see Fig. 17-44, E). Extending gingival margins into
the gingival sulcus should be avoided where possible
because subgingival margins are more difficult to restore and may be a contributing factor to periodontal
disease .
The proximal ditch cut should be sufficiently deep
into dentin (i.e., 0.5 to 0.6 mm) that retention locks, if
deemed necessary, can be prepared into the axiolingual
and axiofacial line angles without undermining the
proximal enamel. If the proximal ditch cut is entirely in
dentin, the axial wall usually will be too deep. Because
the proximal enamel becomes thinner from occlusal to
gingival, the end of the bur will come closer to the external tooth surface as the cutting progresses gingivally
(see Fig. 17-44, B). Premolars may have proximal boxes
that are shallower pulpally than molars, because premolars typically have thinner enamel. However, in the
tooth crown the ideal dentinal depth of the axial wall of
proximal boxes of premolars and molars should be the
same (two thirds to three fourths the diameter of the
No. 245 bur [or 0.5 to 0.6 mm]).'4 When extension places
the gingival margin in cementum, the initial pulpal
depth of the axiogingival line angle should be 0.7 to
0.8 mm (the diameter of the tip end of the No. 245 bur is
0.8 mm). The bur may shave the side of the wedge that
is protecting the rubber dam and underlying gingiva
(see Fig. 17-44, C).
The gingival depth of the proximal ditch may be measured by first noting the depth of the nonrotating bur in
the ditch. Then, remove the bur from the preparation
and hold it in the facial embrasure at the same level to
observe the relationship of the end of the bur to the
proximal contact. A calibrated periodontal probe may
also be used.
The proximal ditch cut may be diverged gingivally to
ensure that the faciolingual dimension at the gingival
is greater than at the occlusal (see Fig. 17-44, G).
However, the shape of the No. 245 inverted cone bur
should provide this divergence. The gingival divergence

C H A P T E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 17-44 Isolation of proximal enamel. A, Bur position to begin proximal ditch cut. B, Proximal ditch is extended gingivally to desired level of gingival wall (i.e., floor). C, Variance in pulpal depth of axiogingival line angle as extension of gingival wall varies: a, at minimal gingival
extension; b, at moderate extension; c, at extension that places gingival margin in cementum,
whereupon pulpal depth is 0.75 to 0.8 mm and bur may shave side of wedge. D, Proximal ditch
cut results in axial wall that follows outside contour of proximal surface. E, Position of proximal
walls (i.e., facial, lingual, gingival) should not be overextended with No. 245 bur, considering additional extension provided by hand instruments once remaining spurs of enamel are removed.
F, When small lesion is prepared, gingival margin should clear adjacent tooth by only 0.5 mm.
This clearance may be measured with side of explorer. The diameter of the tine of a No. 23 explorer is five tenths millimeter,'/, inch (6.3 mm) from its tip. G, Faciolingual dimension of proxi mal ditch is greater at gingival than at occlusal level. H, To further isolate and weaken proximal
enamel, bur is moved toward and perpendicular to proximal surface (parallel to direction of
enamel rods). 1, Side of bur may emerge slightly through proximal surface at level of gingival
floor (arrow).

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

A.

Removing isolated enamel. A, Using spoon excavator to fracture out weakened
proximal enamel. B, Occlusal view with proximal enamel removed. C, Proximal view with proxi mal enamel removed.

FIG 17-45

Wedging. A, Round toothpick wedge placed in gingival embrasure protects gingiva and rubber dam during preparation of proximal box. B, Triangular wedge is indicated when
deep gingival extension of proximal box is anticipated, because
wedge's greatest cross-sectional dimension is at its base. Consequently, it will more readily engage the remaining clinical
tooth surface.
FIG 17-46

B
contributes to retention form and provides for desirable
extension of the facial and lingual proximal margins to
include defective tooth structure or old restorative material at the gingival level, while conserving the marginal ridge and providing for 90-degree amalgam at the
margins on this ridge .
Occasionally, it is permissible not to extend the outline of the proximal box facially or lingually beyond the
proximal contact to conserve tooth structure . 69 An example of this modification is a narrow proximal lesion
where there is broad proximal contact in a patient with
low risk for caries. If it is necessary to extend as much as
a millimeter to break contact arbitrarily, leave the proxi mal margin in the contact. Usually it is the facial margin that is affected by this rule, which may not extend
beyond the proximal contact into the facial embrasure.
In completing the proximal extensions, next make
two cuts, one starting at the facial limit of the proximal
ditch and the other starting at the lingual limit, extending toward and perpendicular to the proximal surface
(until the bur is nearly through the enamel at contact
level) (see Fig. 17-44, H). The side of the bur may emerge
slightly through the surface at the level of the gingival
floor (see Fig. 17-44, I). This weakens the remaining
enamel by which the isolated portion is held. If this
level is judged to be insufficiently gingival, additional

gingival extension should be accomplished using the
isolated proximal enamel that is still in place to guide
the bur. This prevents the bur from marring the proximal surface of the adjacent tooth. At this stage, however,
the remaining wall of enamel often breaks away during
cutting, especially when high speed is used. At such
times, if additional use of the bur is indicated, a matrix
band may be used around the adjacent tooth to prevent
marring its proximal surface. The isolated enamel, if still
in place, may be fractured out with a spoon excavator
(Fig. 17-45) or by additional movement of the bur.
To protect the gingiva and the rubber dam when extending the gingival wall gingivally, a wooden wedge
should already be in place in the gingival embrasure to
depress the soft tissue and rubber dam. A round toothpick wedge is preferred, unless a deep gingival extension is anticipated (Fig. 17-46, A). A triangular (i.e.,
anatomic) wedge is more appropriate for deep gingival
extensions because the greatest cross-sectional dimension of the wedge is at its base; as the gingival wall is
cut, the bur's end corner may slightly shave the wedge
(see Fig. 17-46, B). (For wedge insertion, refer to Chapter 10.)
With the enamel hatchet (10-7-14), the bin-angle chisel
(12-7-8), or both, cleave away any remaining undermined proximal enamel (Fig. 17-47, A and B), establishing

C H A P T E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 17-47 Removing remaining undermined proximal enamel with enamel hatchet on facial
proximal wall (A), lingual proximal wall (B), and gingival wall (C).

f I G.

17-48 Direction of mesiofacial and mesiolingual walls. A, Failure caused by weak enamel
margin. B, Failure caused by weak-amalgam
margin. C, Proper direction to proximal walls results in full-length enamel rods and 90-degree
amalgam at preparation margin. Note also that
retention locks have been cut 0.2 mm inside DEJ,
and their direction of depth is parallel to DEJ.
A

the proper direction to the mesiolingual and mesiofacial
walls. Proximal margins having cavosurface angles of
90 degrees are indicated. Cavosurface angles of 90 degrees ensure that no undermined enamel rods remain
on the proximal margins and that the maximal edge
strength of amalgam is maintained. Exercise care not to
thrust the cutting edge against the gingival wall, because this can cause a craze line (i.e., fracture) that extends gingivally in the enamel, perhaps to the cervical
line. Fig. 17-48 shows the importance of the correct direction of the mesiofacial and mesiolingual walls, dictated by enamel rod direction and physical properties of
the amalgam. Again, ideally the mesiofacial and mesiolingual margins of the conservative preparation
should clear the adjacent tooth by only 0.2 to 0.3 mm
(see Figs. 17-60 and 17-106). If hand instruments were
not used to remove the remaining spurs of enamel, the
proximal margins would have undermined enamel. To
create 90-degree facial and lingual proximal margins
with the No. 245 bur, the proximal margins would have
to be significantly overextended for an otherwise conservative preparation (see Fig. 17-44, E).
In addition, remove the weakened enamel along the
gingival wall by using the enamel hatchet in a scraping
motion (see Fig. 17-47, C. If the gingival cavosurface
margin is in enamel, it will usually require a slight
bevel, as described later. Ideally the minimal clearance

of the completed gingival margin with the adjacent
tooth is 0.5 mm. 69 This may be measured by passing an
explorer tine of this diameter between the margin and
adjacent tooth (see Fig. 17-44, F).
When the isolation of the proximal enamel has been
properly executed, the proximal box can be completed
easily with hand-cutting instruments. Otherwise, more
cutting with rotary instruments may be indicated. Highspeed equipment has reduced the use of hand instruments. However, the value of sharp hand-cutting instruments should not be underestimated.
When a rotary instrument is used in a proximal box
after the proximal enamel is removed, there is a danger
of the instrument either marring the adjacent proximal
surface or "crawling out" of the box into the gingiva or
across the proximal margins. The latter misfortune produces a rounded cavosurface angle, which, if not corrected, will result in a weak amalgam margin of less
than 90 degrees. The danger of this occurring is
markedly reduced when high-speed burs are used.
When finishing enamel margins by rotary instrument,
use intermittent application of the bur along with air
coolant to improve vision.
Primary resistance form is provided by: (1) the pulpal
and gingival walls being relatively flat and perpendicular to forces directed with the long axis of the tooth;
(2) restricting extension of the walls to allow strong

C H A P T E R 17

Classes 1, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 17-49 Management of small-to-moderate size carious lesion on pulpal wall. A, Infected
carious dentin extending beyond ideal pulpal wall position. B, Incorrect lowering of pulpal wall
to include infected carious dentin. C, Correct extension facially and lingually beyond infected
carious dentin. Note excavation below ideal pulpal wall level and facial and lingual seats are at
i deal pulpal wall level.

cusps and ridge areas to remain with sufficient dentin
support; (3) restricting the occlusal outline form (where
possible) to areas receiving minimal occlusal contact66
(4) the reverse curve optimizing the strength of both the
amalgam and tooth structure at the junction of the occlusal step and proximal box; (5) slightly rounding the
internal line angles to reduce stress concentration in
tooth structure (automatically created by bur design, except for the axiopulpal line angle); and (6) providing
enough thickness of restorative material to prevent its
fracture under mastication. Primary retention form is
provided by the occlusal convergence of facial and lingual walls and by the dovetail design of the occlusal
step, if present.
This completes the initial tooth preparation. Initial
Class II tooth preparation is defined as extension of external walls at a specified limited depth to:
• Reach sound tooth structure
• Resist fracture of the tooth or restorative material
from forces directed with the long axis of the tooth
• Retain restorative material in the tooth (see Chapter 6)
Axial and pulpal walls should be prepared to this
ideal depth whether cutting in existing restorative material or caries. With proper outline form the pulpal and
axial line angles should be in sound dentin.
After completing the initial tooth preparation, the adjacent proximal surface should be evaluated. An adjacent proximal restoration may require recontouring and
smoothing to develop proper contact, contour, and embrasure form for the new restoration. This may be done
with abrasive finishing strips or disks. Detection of
caries would indicate restoration of the adjacent proximal surface or replacement of the existing restoration. If
inadvertent minimal damage occurred to the adjacent
proximal surface during initial tooth preparation, it
should be corrected with abrasive strips and disks.

Final Tooth Preparation
Removal of any remaining defective enamel and
infected carious dentin. Removing any remaining

enamel pit and fissure and infected carious dentin on
the pulpal wall in Class II preparations is accomplished
in the same manner as in the Class I preparation. The
presence of infected carious dentin on a portion of either
the pulpal wall (floor) or axial wall does not indicate
deepening the entire wall. Infected carious dentin is removed with a slowly revolving round bur of appropriate size or a discoid-type spoon excavator or both. Stop
excavating when a hard or firm feel with an explorer or
small spoon excavator is achieved. This often occurs before all of the stained or discolored dentin is removed.
Removing any remaining enamel pit and fissure and infected carious dentin should not affect resistance form.
To enhance good resistance form, the occlusal step
should have pulpal seats at initial preparation depth,
perpendicular to the long axis of the tooth in sound
tooth structure and peripheral to the excavated area or
areas (Fig. 17-49).
Any old restorative material (including base and
liner) remaining should not be removed if there is no evidence of recurrent caries, if its periphery is intact, and
if the tooth pulp is symptomless. This concept is particularly important if removal of all remaining restorative
material may increase the risk of pulpal exposure.
Caries in the axial wall does not dictate extending the
entire axial wall toward the pulp (Fig. 17-50). Recall that
in initial tooth preparation, the facial, lingual, and gingival walls of the proximal box are extended as necessary until each wall is located in sound dentin. In all
such extensions the pulpal depth of the axiofacial, axiolingual, and axiogingival line angles should never be altered because of the presence of caries in the axial wall
"central" of these line angles. Infected carious dentin in
the axial wall is then removed with suitably sized round
burs or spoon excavators or both.

C H A P T E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

After completion of the minimal gingival extension
(gingivoaxial line angle is in sound dentin), a remnant
of the enamel portion of a carious lesion may remain on
the gingival floor (wall), seen in the form of a decalcified
(i.e., white, chalky) or faulty area bordering the margin
(Fig. 17-51). This dictates extending part or the entire
gingival floor gingivally to place it in sound tooth structure. Extension of the entire gingival wall to include a
large carious lesion may place the gingival margin so
deep that proper matrix application and (particularly)

wedging are extremely difficult. Fig. 17-52, A, illustrates
an outline form that extends gingivally in the central
portion of the gingival wall to include caries that is deep
gingivally, although leaving the facial and lingual gingival corners at a more occlusal position. This partial extension of the gingival wall will permit wedging of the
matrix band where otherwise it may be difficult and
damaging to the soft tissue. In this instance, the gingival
wedge may not tightly support a small portion of the
band. Special care must then be exercised by placing

FIG 17-50 Management of moderate-to-extensive size carious lesion. Infected carious dentin
on axial wall does not call for preparing axial wall toward pulp as shown by dotted lines. Infected carious dentin extending pulpally of ideal axial wall position is removed with round bur.

FIG 17-51 Remnant of carious lesion bordering the enamel
margin after insufficient gingival extension. Such a lesion indicates extending part or all of gingival floor gingivally to place
i t in sound tooth structure. (Courtesy of Dr. C.L. Sockwell.)

FIG 17-51 A, Outline form that permits extension of center portion of gingival wall to
facilitate proper matrix construction and
wedging in situations where caries extends
deep gingivally. B, Outline form that permits
partial wall extension facially and gingivally
to conserve tooth structure.

C H A P T E R 17

small amounts of amalgam in this area first and condensing lightly but thoroughly. In addition, care is exercised in carving the restoration in this area to remove
any excess that may have extruded gingivally during
condensation.
Fig. 17-52, B, illustrates a carious excavation facially
and gingivally beyond the conventional margin position. Such minor variations from ideal preparation form
permit conservation of tooth structure. A partial extension of a facial or lingual wall is permissible if: (1) the
entire wall is not weakened, (2) the extension remains
accessible and visible, (3) sufficient gingival seats remain to support the restoration, and (4) a butt joint fit at
the amalgam and enamel margin (90-degree amalgam
angle and 90-degree cavosurface angle) is possible.
Pulp protection. The reader is referred to this same
step in tooth preparation in the previous section, Conservative Class I Amalgam Preparations.
Secondary resistance and retention forms. Secondary resistance form in final tooth preparation involves both resistance of the remaining tooth structure
against fracture from oblique forces and resistance of
restorative material against fracture. Restricting extensions of external walls provides the former; the latter is
enhanced by using the gingival margin trimmer to bevel
or round the axiopulpal line angle (Fig. 17-53), thereby
increasing the bulk of and decreasing the stress concentration within the restorative material. Proximal retention locks (discussed later) may also increase the fracture resistance of the amalgam restoration." ,"
The use of retention locks in proximal boxes is controversial. It has been reported that proximal retention
locks in the axiofacial and axiolingual line angles significantly strengthen the isthmus of a Class Il restoration,
and that these locks are significantly superior to axiogingival grooves in increasing the restoration's fracture strength . However, others have suggested that
retention locks located occlusal to the axiopulpal line
angle provide more resistance than conventional

FIG . 17-53 Beveling axiopulpal line angle.

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

grooves. It has also been reported that with highcopper amalgams, proximal retention locks are unnecessary in preparations that include dovetails.
However, the use of retention locks is recommended in tooth
preparation with extensive proximal boxes.
Ideally secondary retention form for the occlusal and
proximal portions of the preparation should be independent of each other. The occlusal convergence of the
facial and lingual walls and the dovetail design (if
needed) provide sufficient retention form to the occlusal
portion of the tooth preparation. The occlusal convergence of the mesiofacial and mesiolingual walls offers
retention in the proximal portion of the preparation
against displacement occlusally. To enhance retention
form of the proximal portion, proximal locks may be indicated to counter proximal displacement.
Many
operators use proximal locks routinely to ensure that
each portion of the tooth preparation is independently
retentive. However, evidence suggests that retentive
locks may not be needed in conservative, narrow proximal boxes."'
To prepare a retention lock, use a No. 169L bur with
air coolant (to improve vision) and reduced speed (to
improve tactile "feel" and control). The bur is placed in
the properly positioned axiolingual line angle and directed (i.e., translated) to bisect the angle (Fig. 17-54, A)
approximately parallel to the DEJ (Fig. 17-55). This positions the retention lock 0.2 mm inside the DEJ, thus
maintaining the enamel support. The bur is tilted to allow cutting to the depth of the diameter of the end of
the bur at the point angle and permit the lock to diminish in depth occlusally, terminating at the axiolinguopulpal point angle. In a similar manner prepare the facial lock in the axiofacial line angle. When the axiofacial
and axiolingual line angles are less than 2 mm in length,
reduce the tilt the bur slightly so that the proximal locks
are extended occlusally to disappear midway between
the DEJ and the enamel margin (see Fig. 17-54, B and C.
There are four characteristics or determinants of proximal locks: (1) position, (2) translation, (3) depth, and
(4) occlusogingival orientation (see Fig. 17-55). Position
refers to the axiofacial and axiolingual line angles of initial tooth preparation (0.2 mm axial to DEJ). It is important to note that the retention locks should be placed
0.2 mm inside the DEJ, regardless of the depth of the
axial walls and axial line angles. Translation refers to the
direction of movement of the axis of the bur. Depth
refers to the extent of translation (i.e., 0.5 mm at gingival floor level). Occlusogingival orientation refers to the
tilt of the No. 169L bur, which dictates the occlusal
height of the lock, given a constant depth.
Some operators prefer using the No. 1/4 bur to cut the
proximal locks. The rotating bur is carried into the axiolinguogingival (or axiofaciogingival) point angle, and
then moved parallel to the DEJ to the depth of the diameter of the bur. It is then drawn occlusally along the

C H A P T E R 11

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

A

FIG . 17-54 Proximal retention l ocks.
A, Position of No. 169L bur to prepare
retention lock as bur is moved lingually
and pulpally. B, Lingual lock. Note
dentin support of proximal enamel.
C, Completed locks. D, Locks prepared
with No. '/, bur. E, Completed locks.

axiolingual (or axiofacial) line angle, allowing the lock
to become shallower and to terminate at the axiolinguopulpal (or axiofaciopulpal) point angle (or more occlusally if the line angles are less than 2 mm in length)
(see Fig. 17-54, D and E).
Regardless of the method used in placing the locks,
extreme care is necessary to prevent the removal of
dentin that immediately supports the proximal enamel.
In addition, it is essential not to prepare the locks entirely in the axial wall (i.e., incorrect translation [moving
the bur only in a pulpal direction]), because no effective
retention is obtained and there is a risk of pulpal involvement.
An improperly positioned axiofacial or axiolingual
line angle must not be used as a positional guide for the
proximal lock. If the axial line angle is too shallow, the
lock may undermine the enamel of dentinal support. If
the line angle is too deep, preparation of the lock may
result in exposure of the pulp. Retention locks should
always be placed in the facial and lingual proximal
walls (0.2 mm inside the DEJ), regardless of the depth of
the axial wall.
Procedure for finishing external walls. The preparation walls and margins should not have unsupported
enamel and marginal irregularities (if present, they re-

quire correction). It has been demonstrated that less
marginal leakage occurs if the margins are straight and
smooth .3' No occlusal cavosurface bevel is indicated in
the tooth preparation for amalgam. Ideally there should
be a 90-degree cavosurface angle (maximum of 100 degrees) at the proximal margin. The occlusal line angle
may be 90 to 100 degrees or greater. This angle aids in
obtaining a marginal amalgam angle of 90 degrees (no
less than 80 degrees). Clinical experience has established that this "butt joint" relationship of enamel and
amalgam creates the strongest margin. Amalgam is a
brittle material and may fracture under occlusal stress if
its angle at the margin is less than 80 degrees.
Use the mesial gingival margin trimmer (13-85-10-14,
R and L) to establish a slight cavosurface bevel at the
gingival margin (6 centigrades [or 20 degrees] declination gingivally) if it is in enamel. The bevel is angled no
more than necessary to ensure full-length enamel rods
forming the gingival margin, and it is no wider than the
enamel (Fig. 17-56). When the gingival margin is positioned gingival to the cementoenamel junction (CEJ) on
the tooth root, the bevel is not indicated. ( When beveling the gingival margin on the distal surface, use the
distal gingival margin trimmer [3-95-10-14, R and L]. Alternatively, the side of an explorer tine may be used to

C H A P T E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 17-55 Four characteristics of retentive locks. A, Occlusal view of MO preparation before
placement of retention locks. B, Proximal view of MO preparation. C and D, Position, translation, and depth. E and F, Occlusogingival orientation.

FIG . 17-56 A, Bevel of enamel portion of gingival wall is established with gingival margin trimmer to ensure full-length enamel rods forming gingival margin. B and C, Sharp angles at linguogingival and faciogingival corners are rounded by rotational sweep with gingival margin
tri mmer.

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

remove any friable enamel at the gingival margin. The
tine is placed in the gingival embrasure apical to the
gingival margin. With some pressure against the prepared tooth, the tine is moved occlusally across the gingival margin to "trim" the margin.
Final procedures: cleaning, inspecting, desensitizing, and bonding. Refer to the similar section in Conservative Class I Amalgam Restorations.
Variations of One Proximal Surface Tooth Preparations. The following sections prevent variations in tooth
preparation for some conservative Class II amalgam
restorations. However, in most clinical situations, the
restoration presented would be restored with composite. If amalgam is used, the features presented should
be considered in the tooth preparation portion of the
procedure.
Mandibular first premolar. For the conservative
Class II tooth preparation for amalgam on a mandibular
first premolar, the conventional approach and technique
must be modified because the morphologic structure of
this tooth is different from the other posterior teeth (particularly because of the diminished size of the lingual
cusp). For this tooth, as in all teeth, the principles of

F I G . 17-57 When mandibular first and second premolars are
compared, note differences in size of pulp chambers, lingual
cusps, and direction of pulpal walls.

tooth preparation for amalgam must be correlated with
the physical properties of the restorative material and
the anatomic structure of the tooth. The relationship of
the pulp chamber to the DEJ and the relatively small size
of the lingual cusp are illustrated in Fig. 17-57 (this figure also illustrates the correct position of the pulpal wall
and how it differs in direction as compared with the second premolar). Incorrect preparation of the central
groove area could weaken the lingual cusp and excessive extension in a facial direction could approach or expose the facial pulp horn. Therefore when preparing the
occlusal portion, tilt the bur slightly lingually to establish the correct pulpal wall direction (see Fig. 17-17, B).
In addition, the mandibular first premolar presents a
variety of occlusal patterns, most of which exhibit a
large transverse ridge of enamel. Often such a ridge has
no connecting fissure between the mesial and distal pits,
dictating a Class II preparation with an outline form
that does not extend to, or across, the ridge (Fig. 17-58,
A). If the opposite pit or proximal surface is faulty, it is
restored with a separate restoration.
For a preparation that will not cross the transverse
ridge, prepare the proximal box before the occlusal portion to prevent removing the tooth structure that will
form the isthmus between the occlusal dovetail and the
proximal box. Enter the pit adjacent to the involved
proximal surface with the No. 245 bur. Immediately after the entry, direct the bur into the proximal marginal
ridge and then pulpally (if necessary) until the proximal
DEJ is visible. The bur axis for the proximal ditch cut
should be parallel to the tooth crown, which is tilted
slightly lingually for the mandibular posterior teeth.
Isolate the proximal enamel, and complete the proximal
box as previously described for the mandibular second
premolar. Return the bur to the area of entry, and prepare the occlusal step with a dovetail, if needed. When

FIG . 17-58 Mandibular first premolar with sound transverse ridge. A, Two-surface tooth preparation that does not include opposite pit. B, Occlusal outline form. C, Proximal view of completed preparation.

CHAPTER

17

preparing the occlusal portion, the bur is tilted slightly
lingual to establish the correct pulpal wall direction
(which maintains dentin support for the small lingual
cusp and prevents encroachment on the facial pulp
horn). Thus the primary difference in tooth preparation
on this tooth, when compared with the preparation on
other posterior teeth, is the facial inclination of the pulpal wall. Broaden the isthmus as necessary, but maintain the dovetail retention form, if required. Fig. 17-58,
B, illustrates the correct occlusal outline form. Removing any remaining caries (if present) and inserting necessary liners or bases or both precede the placement of
proximal locks and finishing of the enamel margins to
complete the preparation (see Fig. 17-58, C).
Maxillary first molar. When mesial and distal proximal surface amalgam restorations are indicated on the
maxillary first molar that has an unaffected oblique
ridge, separate two-surface tooth preparations are indicated (rather than a mesioocclusodistal [MOD] preparation) because the strength of the tooth crown is significantly greater when the oblique ridge is intact.
The MO tooth preparation is generally uncomplicated (Fig. 17-59, A). Extension into the enamel oblique
ridge is avoided whenever possible to maintain the
cross-splinting strength it provides to the tooth. Occasionally extension through the ridge and into the distal
pit is necessary because of the extent of caries. The outline of this OL pit-and-fissure portion is similar to that
of the Class I OL preparation. Fig. 17-59, B and C, illustrates a MO preparation extended to include the distal
pit and the outline form that includes the distal oblique
and lingual fissures.

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

When the occlusal fissure extends into the facial cusp
ridge and it cannot be removed by enameloplasty, the
defect should be eliminated by extension of the tooth
preparation. Occasionally this can be accomplished by
tilting the bur to create an occlusal divergence of the facial wall, while maintaining the dentin support of the
ridge. If this fault cannot be eliminated without extending the margin to the height of the cusp ridge or undermining the enamel margin, extend the preparation facially through the ridge (see Fig. 17-59, D). The pulpal
wall of this facial extension may have remaining
enamel, but a depth of 1.5 to 2 mm is necessary to provide sufficient bulk of material for adequate strength.
For the best esthetic results minimal extension of the
proximal mesiofacial margin is indicated.
The distoocclusal (DO) tooth preparation may take
one of several outlines, depending on the occlusal
anatomy. The occlusal outline is determined by the pitand-fissure pattern and by the amount and extension of
caries. An extension onto the lingual surface to include
a lingual fissure should be prepared only after the distolingual proximal margin is established. This may permit the operator to maintain more tooth structure between the distolingual wall and the lingual fissure
extension, resulting in more strength of the distolingual
cusp. It is accomplished by preparing the lingual fissure
extension more at the expense of the mesiolingual cusp
than the distolingual cusp. Nevertheless, the distolingual cusp on many maxillary molars (particularly maxillary second molars) may be weakened during such a
distoocclusolingual tooth preparation because of the
small cuspal portion remaining between the lingual fis-

FIG . 17-59 Maxillary first molar. A, Conventional MO
preparation. B, MO preparation extended to include distal pit. C, Mesioocclusolingual preparation, including
distal pit and distal oblique and lingual fissures. D, MO
preparation with facial fissure extension.

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

17-60
To produce inconspicuous margin
on maxillary first premolar, mesiofacial wall
does not diverge gingivally and facial extension
with a No. 245 bur should be minimal so that
mesiofacial proximal margin of preparation will
minimally clear the contact as margin is finished.
A, Occlusal view. B, Facial view.

FIG

sure preparation and the distolingual proximal wall. In
addition, caries excavation may weaken the cusp. Thus
capping of the distolingual cusp is often necessary to
provide proper resistance form. The procedure is described in a later section (see Fig. 17-70).
Maxillary first premolar. A Class II amalgam tooth
preparation involving the mesial surface of a maxillary
first premolar requires special attention because the
mesiofacial embrasure is esthetically prominent. The occlusogingival preparation of the facial wall of the mesial
box should be parallel to the long axis of the tooth instead of converging occlusally to minimize an unesthetic display of amalgam in the faciogingival corner of
the restoration. In addition, the facial extension of the
mesiofacial proximal wall should be minimal so that the
mesiofacial proximal margin of the preparation will
only minimally clear the contact as the margin is finished with an appropriate enamel hatchet or chisel
(Fig. 17-60).
If the mesial proximal involvement (1) is limited to a
fissure in the marginal ridge that is at risk for caries, (2)
is not treatable by enameloplasty, and (3) does not involve the proximal contact, the proximal portion of the
tooth preparation is prepared by extending through the
fault with the No. 245 bur so that the margins are lingual to the contact. Often this means that the proximal
box will be the faciolingual width of the bur and the gingival floor may be at the same depth as the pulpal floor.
Retention form for this extension is provided by the
slight occlusal convergence of the facial and lingual
walls (see Fig. 17-9).
If proximal caries is limited to the mesiolingual embrasure, do not involve the mesial proximal contact in
the tooth preparation. If only the lingual aspect of the
mesial proximal contact is carious, the mesiofacial wall
may be left in contact with the adjacent tooth (reducing
the display of amalgam). A Class II tooth preparation involving the distal surface of the maxillary first premolar
is similar to the preparation of the mandibular second
premolar described earlier.
Box-only preparation. When restoring a small, cavitated, proximal lesion in a tooth with neither occlusal
fissures nor a previously inserted occlusal restoration, a
proximal box preparation without an occlusal step has
been recommended. To maximize retention, prepara-

8 pt 17-61 Simple box restoration without occlusal step is
permissible when restoring small proximal lesion in tooth
without either occlusal fissures or previously inserted occlusal
restoration and when involved marginal ridge does not support occlusal contact. Note that proximal locks extend to occlusal surface.

tions with facial and lingual walls that almost oppose
each other are recommended. Therefore this type of
preparation should be limited to a proximal surface with
a narrow proximal contact (allowing minimal facial and
lingual extensions). As in the typical preparation, the facial and lingual proximal walls converge occlusally Retention locks are necessary in box-only preparations .
The proximal retention locks should have a 0.5-mm
depth at the gingival point angle, tapering to a depth of
0.3 mm at the occlusal surface (Fig. 17-61).
Modifications in Tooth Preparation
Slot preparation for root caries. Older patients
who have gingival recession exposing the cementum
may experience caries on the proximal root surface that
is appreciably gingival to the proximal contact (Fig. 1762, A). Assuming that the contact does not need restoring, the tooth preparation is usually approached from
the facial and has the form of a slot (see Fig. 17-62, B). A
lingual approach is used when the caries is limited to
the linguoproximal surface. Amalgam is particularly indicated for slot preparations if isolation is difficult.'
After anesthesia and isolation of the operating field,
prepare the initial outline form from a facial approach
with a No. 2 or No. 4 bur using high speed and airwater spray. Outline form extension to sound tooth structure is at a limited depth axially (i.e., 0.75 to 1 mm at the
gingival aspect [if no enamel is present], increasing to

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG 17-62

Slot preparation. A, Mesiodistal longitudinal section illustrating carious lesion.
Proximal contact is not involved. B, Initial tooth preparation. C, Tooth preparation with infected
carious dentin removed. D, Retention grooves are shown in longitudinal section, and transverse
section through plane cdillustrates contour of axial wall and direction of facial and lingual walls.
E, Preparing retention form to complete tooth preparation. F, Matrix for slot preparation: a, Facial view of wedged matrix; b, Wedged matrix as viewed in transverse cross-section (x), gingival to gingival floor; c, Wedged matrix as viewed in transverse cross-section (y), occlusal to gingival floor.

1 to 1.25 mm at the occlusal wall [if margin in enamel])
(see Fig. 17-62, B). If the occlusal margin is in enamel,
the axial depth should be 0.5 mm inside the DEJ. During
this extension the bur should not remove any infected
carious dentin from the axial wall deeper than the outline form initial depth. The remaining infected carious
dentin (if any) will be removed during final tooth preparation (see Fig. 17-62, C). External walls should form a
90-degree cavosurface angle. With a facial approach, the
lingual wall should face facially as much as possible.
This will aid condensation of amalgam during its insertion. The facial wall must be extended to provide access
and visibility or convenience form (see Fig. 17-62, D).
In final tooth preparation use the No. 2 or No. 4 bur to
remove any remaining infected carious dentin on the
axial wall. If indicated, apply a liner or base or both (as
described for the Class I tooth preparation).
Prepare retention grooves with a No. 1/, bur into the
occlusoaxial and gingivoaxial line angles, 0.2 mm inside

the DEJ or 0.3 to 0.5 mm inside the cemental cavosurface
margin (see Fig. 17-62, E). The depth of these grooves is
one half the diameter of the bur head (i.e., 0.25 mm), and
the bur is directed to bisect the angle formed by the
j unction of occlusal (or gingival) and axial walls. Ideally
the direction of the occlusal groove is slightly more occlusal than axial, and the direction of an gingival groove
would be slightly more gingival than axial (as in the
Class III amalgam preparation) (see Figs. 18-8 and
18-13).
Before application of the matrix, dentin should be desensitized or a bonding system applied (refer to the discussion of dentin desensitizers and bonding systems in
Conservative Class I Amalgam Preparations). The matrix for inserting amalgam in a slot preparation for root
caries is similar to that illustrated in Fig. 17-62, F.
For those instances where root caries encircles the
tooth, the proximal areas can be restored as described
previously. Subsequently, Class V preparations are

712

C H A P T E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG 17-63 Restoration outlines for rotated teeth. A, MO outline for mandibular premolar with
45-degree rotation. B, MO outline for mandibular premolar with 90-degree rotation. C, Slot
preparation outline for restoration of a small mesial lesion involving proximal contact of
mandibular premolar with 90-degree rotation.

prepared and abutted with the proximal restorations.
The amalgam used to restore the proximals should be
fully set (to avoid dislocation during preparation and
during insertion of the Class V restorations). Alternatively, the Class V portions can be restored first. When
the proximals are restored first, the mesial and distal
walls of the Class V preparations would be in amalgam.
Doing a circumferential restoration in segments allows
proper condensation of amalgam. A full-coverage
restoration is usually preferred if caries encircles the
tooth cervically. These patients should be counseled to
improve their oral hygiene and use fluoride rinses.
Rotated teeth. Tooth preparation for rotated teeth
follows the same principles as for normally aligned
teeth. The outline form for a MO tooth preparation on
the rotated mandibular second premolar (Fig. 17-63, A)
differs from normal in that its proximal box is displaced
facially because the proximal caries involves the mesiofacial line angle of the tooth crown.
When the tooth is rotated 90 degrees and the "proximal" lesion is on the facial or lingual surface or orthodontic correction is declined or ruled out, the preparation may require an isthmus that includes the cuspal
eminence (see Fig. 17-63, B). If the lesion is small, consideration should be given to the slot preparation. In
this instance, the occlusal margin may be in the contact
area or slightly occlusal to it (see Fig. 17-63, C.
Unusual outline forms. Outline forms should conform to the restoration requirements of the tooth and
not necessarily to the classic example of a Class 11 tooth
preparation. For example, as mentioned earlier, a dovetail feature is not required in the occlusal step of a single
proximal surface preparation unless a fissure emanating
from the occlusal step is involved in the preparation.
Another example is an occlusal fissure that is segmented by coalesced enamel (as illustrated previously
for mandibular premolars and maxillary first molars).
This should be treated with individual amalgam
restorations if the preparations are separated by approximately 0.5 mm or more of sound tooth structure
(Fig. 17-64).

FIG 17-64 Restoration of MO tooth preparation with central
fissure segmented by coalesced enamel.

Adjoining restorations. It is permissible to repair or
replace a defective portion of an existing amalgam
restoration if the remaining portion of the original
restoration retains adequate resistance and retention
form. Adjoining restorations on the occlusal surface occur more often in molars because the dovetail of the
new restoration can usually be prepared without eliminating the dovetail of the existing restoration. Where the
two restorations adjoin, care should be taken that the
outline of the second restoration does not weaken
the amalgam margin of the first (Fig. 17-65, A). The intersecting margins of the two restorations should be at
right angles as much as possible. The decision to adjoin
two restorations implies that the first restoration, or a
part of it, does not need to be replaced and assumes that
the procedure for the single proximal restoration (when
compared with a MOD restoration) is less complicated,
especially in matrix application.
Occasionally, preparing an amalgam restoration in
two or more phases is indicated, such as for a Class II lesion that is contiguous with a Class V lesion. Preparing
both lesions before placing the amalgam introduces
condensation problems that can be eliminated by
preparing and restoring the Class II lesion before
preparing and restoring the Class V lesion (see Fig. 1765, B). For example, it is better to condense amalgam
against a carious wall of the first preparation than to attempt condensation where no wall exists.

CHAPTER 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 17-65

Adjoining restorations. A, Adjoining
MO tooth preparation with DO restoration so
that new preparation does not weaken amalgam
margin of existing restoration. B, Preparing and
restoring Class II lesion before preparing and
restoring Class V lesion contiguous with it will
eliminate condensation problems that occur
when both lesions are prepared before either is
restored.

FIG

17-66 Abutment teeth with Class II restorations designed for removable partial denture (RPD). A, Occlusal view showing location of rest seat (rs) and guiding
plane (gp) for a tooth-borne RPD. B, Cross-sectional view illustrating deepened
pulpal wall in area of rest seat (rs) to provide adequate thickness of amalgam. Note
relationship of guiding planes (gp) to tooth-borne RPD. C, Occlusal view showing
mesial rest seat (mrs) for tissue-borne (i.e., distal extension) RPD. D, Lingual view
of tissue-borne RPD showing relationship of RPD to Class II restoration and edentulous ridge (er).

Abutment teeth for removable partial denture.
When the tooth is an abutment for a planned removable
partial denture, the occlusoproximal outline form adjacent to the edentulous region may need additional extension if a rest seat is planned, such as for the toothborne partial denture. This additional extension must be
sufficient facially, lingually, and axially to allow preparing the rest seat in the restoration without jeopardizing
its strength. The facial and lingual proximal walls and respective occlusal margins must be extended so that the
entire rest seat can be prepared in amalgam without encroaching on the occlusal margins. If the rest seat is to be
within the amalgam margins, it is recommended that

there be a minimum of 0.5 mm of amalgam between the
rest seat and the margins (Fig. 17-66, A). The portion of
the pulpal wall apical to the planned rest seat is deepened 0.5 mm so that the total depth of the axiopulpal line
angle measured on the facial and lingual wall is 2.5 mm
(see Fig. 17-66, B). However, a rest seat may involve both
amalgam and enamel as illustrated on the mesiolingual
of an abutment tooth, such as for a tissue-borne (i.e., distal extension) partial denture. In this case, no modification of the outline form of the tooth preparation is indicated (see Fig. 17-66, C). Fig. 17-66, D, illustrates the
relationship of the tissue-borne removable partial denture with the abutment tooth (see Fig. 17-66, C).

C H A P T E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

Class II Amalgam Restorations Involving Both
Proximal Surfaces.

Preparation and Restoration Factors. Perhaps the
best indications for the use of amalgam restorations are
moderate and large Class 11 defects that include both
proximal surfaces and much of the occlusal surface. (Although Chapter 19 presents the technique for very extensive or complex Class 11 amalgam restorations, this
section describes the use of amalgam for moderate and
large Class II restorations.)
The principles of tooth preparation are the same for
all amalgam restorations:

• A cavosurface marginal design that results in an approximate 90-degree amalgam margin
• Appropriate removal of tooth structure to provide for
adequate strength of the amalgam
• Appropriate retention features
The tooth preparation techniques presented for a twosurface Class 11 restoration apply to larger Class II
restorations as well. However, when the defect is large,
certain modifications in tooth preparation may be necessary and the use of an amalgam-bonding system may
be more strongly considered.
Occlusal extensions. Often a larger Class II defect
will require greater extension of the occlusal surface
outline form. This may require extending grooves that
are fissured, capping cusps that are undermined, or extending the outline form up the cuspal inclines. These
alterations can be accomplished easily by following the
principles presented previously. Groove extension occurs at the same initial pulpal floor depth (i.e., 1.5 mm)
but follows the DEJ as the groove is extended in a facial
or lingual direction. Thus the pulpal floor of an extended groove will usually slightly rise occlusally as it
extended toward the cusp ridge (see Fig. 17-35, C). If it
is necessary to extend through the cusp ridge onto the
facial or lingual surface, the preparation is accomplished as described for the OL Class I restoration.
If an occlusal outline form extends up a cuspal incline, the extension should also maintain the pulpal
floor at the desired initial pulpal floor depth (i.e., 1.5
mm). This extension (and groove extension) will usually
require some alteration in the orientation of the No. 245
bur: a slight lingual tilt when extending in a facial direction, and a slight facial tilt when extending in a lingual direction (see Fig. 17-26). Maintaining the correct
pulpal floor depth preserves tooth structure and reduces the potential for pulpal encroachment. The prepared facial (or lingual) cavosurface margin should still
result in a 90-degree amalgam margin.
When the occlusal outline form extends from a primary groove to within two thirds of the distance to a
cusp tip, that cusp is usually sufficiently weakened so as
to require replacement (see Fig. 6-27). Leaving the cusp

in a weakened state may be acceptable if the cusp is
very large or, occasionally, if the amalgam is to be
bonded (which will provide some reinforcement of the
strength of the remaining cuspal structure). Routine
preparations in some teeth may predispose some cusps
for capping (i.e., reduction). The small distal cusp of
mandibular first molars, the distolingual cusp of maxillary molars, and the lingual cusp of some mandibular
premolars (especially first premolars) may be weakened
when normal preparations of surrounding areas of the
tooth are included.
Cusp reduction for an amalgam restoration should result in a uniform amalgam thickness over the reduced
cusp of 1.5 to 2 mm. The thicker amount is necessary for
functional cusps. These dimensions provide adequate
strength for the amalgam. The cusp reduction should
occur as early in the preparation as can be determined
to provide better access and vision for completing the
preparation (see Fig. 19-4). To reduce the cusp, orient
the No. 245 bur parallel to the cuspal incline (lingual incline for facial cusp reductions and facial inclines for lingual cusp reduction) and make several depth cuts in the
cusp (to a depth of 1.5 or 2 mm). The depth cuts will
provide guides for the correct amount of cusp reduction. Without depth cuts, after the beginning reduction
of the cusp the operator may no longer know how much
more reduction is necessary. Use the bur to reduce the
cusp, following the mesiodistal inclines of the cusp. This
results in a uniform reduction. If only one of two facial
(or lingual) cusps is to be capped, the cusp reduction
should extend slightly beyond the facial (or lingual)
groove area, provide the correct amount of tooth structure removal, and meet the adjacent, unreduced cusp to
create a 90-degree cavosurface margin. This results in
both adequate thickness and edge strength of the amalgam. Cusp capping reduces the amount of vertical
preparation wall heights and, therefore, increases the
need for the use of secondary retention features. Increased retention form may be provided by proximal
box retention locks, but may require the use of pins or
slots (as described in Chapter 19). If indicated, cusp capping increases the resistance form of the tooth . 3° ,61 It has
been reported that the survival rate of cusp-covered
amalgam restorations is 72% at 15 years.'
Proximal extensions. Larger Class 11 restorations
will often require larger proximal box preparations.
These may include not only increased faciolingual or
gingival extensions, but also extension around a facial
or lingual line angle. Large proximal box preparations
also need secondary retention features (i.e., retention
locks, pins, slots) for adequate retention form. Extensive
proximal boxes are usually prepared the same as a more
conservative proximal box, but may require modifications (see Figs. 17-72 and 19-8, A). For increased faciolingual extensions, it may be necessary to tilt the No.
245 bur to include proximal faults that are extensive gin-

C H A PT E R

17

gival to the contact area. Tilting the bur (to the lingual
when extending a facial proximal wall or to the facial
when extending a facial wall) conserves more of the
marginal ridge and cuspal tooth structure. Although
this enhances preservation of some tooth structure
strength, it results in a more occlusally convergent wall,
which increases the difficulty of amalgam condensation
in the gingival corners of the preparation.
When proximal extension around a line angle is necessary, it is usually associated with a reduction of the involved cusp (see Fig. 19-14). Such proximal extension is
usually necessitated by a severely defective (or fractured) cusp or a cervical lesion that extends from the facial (or lingual) surface into the proximal area. Often
these areas are included in the preparation by extending
the gingival floor of the proximal box around the line
angle, using the same criteria for preparation as the typical proximal box: (1) facial (or lingual) extension results
in an occlusogingival wall that has a 90-degree cavosurface margin, and (2) axial depth is 0.5 mm inside
the DEJ.
The increased dimensions of a large proximal box
usually require the use of retention locks or other secondary retention form features (i.e., pins or slots). Secondary retention form features better ensure the retention of the amalgam within the preparation by resisting
displacement of the amalgam in an proximal direction
(and occasionally in a occlusal direction). Placement of
retention locks may be more difficult because of the extent of the preparation and the amount of caries excavation that may be necessary. However, if the outline form
is developed correctly, the axiofacial and axiolingual
line angles will be correctly positioned and can be used
as the location for retention lock placement. The retention locks are prepared as described previously.
When the proximal defect is extensive gingivally, isolation of the area, tooth preparation, matrix placement,
and condensation and carving of the amalgam are more
difficult. If the proximal box is extended onto the root
surface, the axial wall depth is no longer dictated by the
DEJ. Any root surface preparation for amalgam should
result in an initial axial wall depth of approximately 0.8
mm. This axial depth provides appropriate strength for
the amalgam, preserves the pulp integrity, and creates
enough dimension for placement of retention locks of
0.5 mm depth, while preserving the strength of the adjacent, remaining marginal dentin and cementum. The
extent of the preparation onto the root surface or the
contour of the tooth or both may require that the bur be
tilted toward the adjacent tooth when preparing the gingival floor of the proximal box (see Figs. 17-44, C, and
13-30, A through C). This may result in an axial wall that
has two planes, the more gingival plane angled slightly
internally. This may also cause more difficulty in retention lock placement. The more occlusal part of the axial
wall may be overreduced if the bur is not tilted.

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

When it is determined that pins or slots are necessary
for a Class II restoration, the axial depth is increased in
pin or slot locations. Techniques for pin and slot placement are presented in Chapter 19.
Caries excavation and pulp protection. Larger
Class II restorations will often require more extensive
caries excavation and pulp protection procedures during tooth preparation. If the outline form is correct after the initial preparation, caries should only remain
on the pulpal floor or axial wall or both. Initial tooth
preparation may have removed all of the caries, defect,
or old restorative material. If so, final tooth preparation will consist of only placement of secondary retention form features. If caries remains, the pulpal or axial
wall or both must be excavated with a suitable technique (see Figs. 17-49 and 17-50). If extensive caries
was the reason for doing the procedure, then excavation should be done with the area properly isolated,
preferably with a rubber dam. Proper isolation may
i mprove the success of an indirect or direct pulpcapping procedure, if necessary. Deep excavations indicate the increased need for pulp protection with a
liner or base or both. If necessary, a calcium hydroxide
liner or a RMGI base is placed as described previously
(see Fig. 17-28).
Amalgam-bonding procedures. Because larger
amalgam restorations have less remaining tooth structure and more amalgam material that must be retained
in the tooth, they may require increased consideration
of amalgam-bonding techniques (see Fig. 17-29). Although amalgam-bonding techniques improve sealing
of the prepared tooth structure and strengthen the remaining unprepared tooth structure, their ability to increase retention form significantly is questionable.
Therefore adequate secondary retention form must be
used in the tooth preparation (in addition to the bonding technique).
Matrix placement. When a tooth preparation is extensive, matrix placement is more difficult. This is especially true for preparations that extend onto the root
surface. Use of modified matrix bands and wedging
techniques may be required (see Figs. 17-82, 17-83, 1785, 17-87, 17-89, and 19-42 through 19-46). (Different
types of matrix systems are presented in Chapter 19.)
Condensation and carving of the amalgam. Larger
Class II preparations that extend around line angles, cap
cusps, or extend onto the root surface require careful
amalgam condensation and carving techniques. Condensation of amalgam is more difficult in areas where
cusps have been capped, where slots or pins have been
placed, where vertical walls are more convergent occlusally, and where the root surface is involved. For
larger restorations, lateral condensation is important to
produce a properly condensed restoration in the gingival corners; also, carving cusps and gingival areas is
more difficult.

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

Examples of Moderate Class II Amalgam Tooth
Preparations That Involve Both Proximal Surfaces
Mandibular second premolar. A moderate MOD

tooth preparation in a mandibular second premolar is illustrated in Fig. 17-67. Note the similarity with the twosurface MO preparation.

FIG . 17-67 MOD preparation on mandibular second premolar.

FIG 17-68 Mandibular first premolar with lingual cusp reduced for capping.

f I G 17-69 Typical three- and four-surface restorations for
maxillary first molar. (See Fig. 17-70 for preparation of distolingual cusp for capping.)

Mandibular first premolar. When a MOD amalgam
tooth preparation is needed for the mandibular first premolar, the support of the small lingual cusp may be conserved by preparing the occlusal step more at the expense of tooth structure facial to the central groove than
lingual. In addition, recall that the bur is tilted slightly
lingually to establish the correct pulpal wall direction.
Despite these precautions, the lingual cusp may need to
be reduced for capping if the lingual margin of the occlusal step extends more than two thirds the distance
from the central fissure to the cuspal eminence (Fig.
17-68). Special attention is given to such cusp reduction
because retention is severely diminished when the cusp
is reduced, eliminating the lingual wall of the occlusal
portion. Depth cuts of 1.5 mm will aid the operator in
establishing the correct amount of cusp reduction and
conserving a small portion of the lingual wall in the occlusal step. It is acceptable when restoring diminutive
nonfunctional cusps, such as the lingual cusp of a
mandibular first premolar, to reduce the cusp only 0.5 to
1 mm and then restore the cusp to achieve an amalgam
thickness of 1.5 mm. This procedure conserves more of
the lingual wall of the isthmus for added retention form.
(For the correct lingual tilt of the bur to establish the appropriate pulpal wall orientation, see Fig. 17-31.)
Maxillary first molar. The MOD tooth preparation
of the maxillary first molar may require extending
through the oblique ridge to unite the proximal preparations with the occlusal step. Cutting through the
oblique ridge is indicated only if: (1) the ridge is undermined with caries, (2) it is crossed by a deep fissure, or
(3) occlusal portions of the separate MO and DO outline
forms leave less than 0.5 mm of tooth structure between
them. The remainder of the outline form is similar to the
two-surface outline forms described previously in this
chapter. Fig. 17-69 illustrates several typical three- and
four-surface restorations for this tooth. The procedure
for reducing the distolingual cusp of a maxillary first
molar for capping is illustrated in Fig. 17-70. Extending
the facial or lingual wall of a proximal box to include the
entire cusp is done (if necessary) to include weak or carious tooth structure or existing restorative material
(Figs. 17-71 and 17-72).

FIG . 17-70 Reduction of distolingual cusp of maxillary molar. A, Cutting depth gauge groove
with side of bur. B, Completed depth gauge groove. C and D, Completed cusp reduction.

CHAPTER

17

Maxillary second molar with caries on distal portion of facial surface. Close examination of the distal
portion of the facial surface of the maxillary second molar may reveal decalcification or cavitation or both.
When the enamel is only slightly cavitated (i.e., softened
and rough), polishing with sandpaper discs may eliminate the fault. Careful brushing technique, daily use of
fluoride (i.e., rinses, toothpaste), and periodic applications of a topical fluoride may prevent further breakdown. However, when decalcification is as deep as the
DEJ and distal proximal caries is also present, the entire
distofacial cusp may need to be included in a mesioocclusodistofacial (MODF) tooth preparation. The facial
lesion may be restored separately, if it is judged that the
distofacial cusp would not be significantly weakened if
left unrestored (i.e., uncapped) by amalgam. In that
case, the MOD preparation would be restored first, followed by preparation and restoration of the facial lesion. When such sequential preparations are contraindicated, the preparation outline (see Fig. 17-71) is
extended gingivally to include the distofacial cusp (just
beyond the caries) and mesially to include the facial
groove. The No. 245 bur should be used to create a gingival floor (i.e., shoulder) perpendicular to the occlusal
force when extending the distal gingival floor to include

FIG

17-71 MODE preparation of maxillary second molar

showing extension to include moderate to extensive caries in
distal half of facial surface. Outline includes distofacial cusp
and facial groove. Dotted line represents soft-tissue level.

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

the affected facial surface. Including the distofacial
caries often indicates a gingival margin that follows the
gingival tissue level. The width of the shoulder should
be approximately 1 or 0.5 mm inside the DEJ, whichever
is greater. Some resistance form is provided by the
shoulder. A retention lock should be placed in the axiofacial line angle of this distofacial extension, similar to
the locks placed in the proximal boxes. For additional
retention, a slot may be placed (see Chapter 19).
Mandibular first molar. The distal cusp on the
mandibular first molar may be weakened when positioning the distofacial wall and margin. Facial extension
of the distofacial margin to clear the distal contact often
places the occlusal outline in the center of the cusp. This
dictates relocation of the margin to provide a sound
enamel wall and 90-degree amalgam that is not on a
cuspal eminence. When the distal cusp is small or weakened or both, extension of the distal gingival floor and
distofacial wall to include the distal cusp places the
margin just mesial to the distofacial groove. (In Fig. 17-72,
compare the ideal distofacial extension [A] with that necessary to include the distal cusp [B].)
Capping the distal cusp is an alternative to extending
the entire distofacial wall when the occlusal margin
crosses the cuspal eminence (see Fig. 17-72, C). A minimal reduction of 2 mm should result in a 2-mm thickness
of amalgam over the capped cusp (see Fig. 17-72, D). The
cusp reduction should result in a butt joint between the
tooth structure and the amalgam. Whenever possible,
capping the distal cusp is more desirable than extending
the distofacial margin because the remaining portion of
the cusp helps in applying the matrix for the development of proper embrasure form. It also conserves tooth
structure. The plane of the reduced cusp should parallel
the facial (or lingual) outline of the unreduced cusp
mesiodistally and the cuspal incline emanating from the
central groove faciolingually.
RESTORATIVE TECHNIQUE
Placing a Sealer or Adhesive System. As stated previously, dentin desensitizers or dentin bonding systems
are currently used in lieu of cavity varnish. Dentin

FIG 17-72 Mandibular first molar. A, Ideal
distofacial extension. B, Entire distal cusp
i ncluded in preparation outline form.
C, Capping of distal cusp is indicated when
occlusal margin crosses cuspal eminence.
D, Left, Distofacial view of distal cusp
shown in C before reduction for capping;
right, distal cusp after reduction. Reduction
of 2 mm is necessary to provide for minimal 2-mm thickness of amalgam.

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG 17-73 Rubbing inlay wax on preparation side of matrix
band.
17-74 Straight and contra-angled Universal (Tofflemire)
retainers. Bands are available with varying occlusogingival
measurements.
FIG

desensitizers are used routinely in conservative Class I
and II tooth preparations. Dentin bonding systems are
usually reserved for more extensive tooth preparations
with deep excavations, foundations, and teeth prone to
fracture. Although dentin bonding systems may provide some adhesion of amalgam to tooth structure, they
are not a substitute for conventional retention features
and preparation resistance form.
If a dentin bonding system is indicated, it is recommended to lubricate the matrix band on the preparation
side before applying the bonding system. This may be
done by rubbing the preparation side of the burnished
(i.e., precontoured) band with a stick of inlay wax (before the band and retainer are assembled) to leave wax
film (Fig. 17-73). It is important to follow carefully the
manufacturers' instructions regarding application of the
bonding system components. Remember that amalgam
must be condensed immediately into the preparation
once the adhesive resin is applied. After matrix removal
and before carving the proximal amalgam, check the
gingival sulcus for any excess bonding resin, which, if
present, must be removed. Refer to an earlier section for
a more complete description of the indications and use
of dentin desensitizers and dentin bonding systems. Often the sealer is applied after matrix placement. Bonding procedures always occur after the matrix placement.
Bonding the amalgam restoration to the tooth structure significantly reduces microleakage. 13,38,89 In addition, amalgam that is bonded to the tooth results in a
restoration that is more resistant to displacement than
conventionally placed amalgam retained with proximal
grooves or dovetails. It is not known whether microleakage, recurrent caries, or retention of the amalgam
is a problem if the resin fatigues and breaks down.
Long-term clinical trials are needed to assess these factors. A 5-year clinical evaluation reported no difference
in Class 11 molar restorations using bonding systems
and those using varnish. However, bonding systems
may decrease cuspal deflection and increase the fracture strength of the tooth .
Placing a Matrix. The primary function of the matrix
is to restore anatomic contours and contact areas. Qualities of a good matrix include: (1) rigidity, (2) establish-

FIG

17-75

Lingual positioning requires contra-angled Univer-

sal retainer.

ment of proper anatomic contour, (3) restoration of correct proximal contact relation, (4) prevention of gingival
excess, (5) convenient application, and (6) ease of removal. The following information presents the technique of placement for the Universal (Tofflemire),
compound-supported, precontoured, and Automatrix
systems.
Universal Matrix. The Universal matrix system (designed by B.R. Tofflemire) is ideally indicated when
three surfaces (i.e., mesial, occlusal, distal) of a posterior
tooth have been prepared (Fig. 17-74). It is commonly
used also for the two-surface Class II restoration. A definite advantage of the Tofflemire matrix retainer is that
it may be positioned on the facial or lingual aspect of
the tooth. Lingual positioning, however, requires the
contra-angled design of the retainer (which can be used
on the facial aspect as well) (Fig. 17-75). The retainer and
band are generally stable when in place. The retainer is
easily separated from the band to expedite removal of
the band. Matrix bands of various occlusogingival
widths are available (see Fig. 17-74). A small Tofflemire
retainer is available for use with the primary dentition.
Even though the Universal retainer is a versatile instrument, it still does not meet all the requirements of
the ideal retainer and band. The conventional, flat
Tofflemire matrix band (unburnished) must be shaped
(i.e., burnished) to achieve proper contour and contact.

CHAPTER

11

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG

17-77 Tofflemire retainer maintaining cotton roll in maxillary vestibule during condensation.
FIG

17-76 Precontoured bands for Universal retainer.

The uncontoured bands are available in two thicknesses, 0.002 (0.05 mm) and 0.0015 (0.038 mm) inch.
Burnishing the thinner band to contour is more difficult,
and the band is less likely to retain its contour when
tightened around the tooth. Proximal surfaces restored
using the Tofflemire matrix may require more carving
than those restored with the compound-supported matrix (presented next). However, much less time is required for placement of the Tofflemire matrix.
Precontoured bands for the Universal retainer are
commercially available and need little or no adjustment
before placing in the retainer (Fig. 17-76). These bands
are also simpler to use because they usually require little or no adjustment or modification after positioning
around the tooth. Although precontoured bands are
more expensive, they are generally preferred over the
uncontoured bands. The difference in cost is justified
because they require less chair time.
Moisture control during insertion of the amalgam is
important for the success of the restoration. (Isolation
procedures are discussed in Chapter 10.) When cotton
roll isolation is used, the Tofflemire retainer will help to
hold the cotton roll in place (Fig. 17-77).
The uncontoured band must be burnished before assembling the matrix band and retainer. Burnishing must
occur in the areas corresponding to the proximal surface
or surfaces to be restored once the band is positioned
around the tooth. For example, if the mesial surface of
the tooth is being restored, the area of the band corresponding to the mesial surface must be burnished. If the
mesial and distal surfaces of the tooth are being restored, the areas corresponding to the mesial and distal
surfaces must be burnished.
Burnishing means that the metal band has been deformed occlusogingivally with a suitable hand instrument to produce a rounded or convex surface that

( when in place around the tooth) will produce a restoration that is symmetric in contour with the adjacent proxi mal surface (Fig. 17-78). The No. 26-28 burnisher is generally recommended for burnishing the band. The band
should be placed on a resilient paper pad because contouring cannot occur on a hard, nonresilient surface.
The smaller round burnisher tip should be used with
firm pressure in back-and-forth, overlapping strokes
along the length of the band, until the band is deformed
occlusogingivally in the appropriate areas. Once the
band is deformed, the larger egg-shaped end may be
used to smooth the burnished band. If a convex surface
is not obvious in burnished areas once the band is removed from the pad, it has not been adequately burnished. The band can be burnished with the larger eggshaped burnisher only, but more work is required to do
so. It is not necessary to burnish the entire length of the
band. When a precontoured band is used, burnishing is
unnecessary.
To prepare the retainer to receive the band, turn the
larger of the knurled nuts counterclockwise until the
locking vise is a short distance ('/, inch [6 mm]) from the
end of the retainer (Fig. 17-79, A). Next, while holding
the large nut, turn the smaller knurled nut counterclockwise until the pointed spindle is free of the slot in
the locking vise (see Fig. 17-79, B). Fold the matrix band
end to end, forming a loop (see Fig. 17-79, C). Notice
that when the band is folded, the gingival edge has a
smaller circumference than the occlusal edge. The band
design accommodates the difference in tooth circumferences at the contact and gingival levels. Position the
band in the retainer so that the slotted side of the retainer is directed gingivally to permit easy separation of
the retainer from the band in an occlusal direction (later
procedure). This is accomplished by placing the occlusal
edge of the band in the correct guide channel (i.e., right,
left, or parallel to the long axis of the retainer) depending on the location of the tooth. The two ends of the
band are placed in the slot of the locking vise, and the

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

smaller of the knurled nuts is turned clockwise to
tighten the pointed spindle against the band (see Fig.
17-79, D). If proximal wedges were used during tooth
preparation, remove them and slip the matrix band over
the tooth (allowing the gingival edge of the band to be
positioned at least 1 mm apical to the gingival margin).
However, do not damage the gingival attachment. If
needed, the larger of the knurled nuts may be turned
counterclockwise to obtain a larger loop to fit over the
tooth. Be careful not to trap rubber dam between the
band and the gingival margin. If the dam material is
trapped between the band and the tooth, stretch the septum of the dam and depress it gingivally to reposition
the dam material. Next, turn the larger knurled nut
clockwise to tighten the band slightly and use an explorer along the gingival margin to determine that the
gingival edge of the band extends beyond the preparation. Once the band is correctly positioned, tighten the
band securely around the tooth.
When one of the proximal margins is deeper gingivally, the Tofflemire MOD band may be modified to prevent damage to the gingival tissue or attachment on the

FIG

more shallow side. A band may be trimmed for the
shallow gingival margin, permitting the matrix to extend farther gingivally for the deeper gingival margin
(Fig. 17-80).
Next, with the mirror lingual (or facial) to the tooth,
position the reflecting surface to view the contour of the
strip through the interproximal space (Fig. 17-81). Evaluate the band by viewing the proximal contour or contours of the band, and note the symmetry of the band
and adjacent surface. The occlusogingival contour
should be convex, with the height of contour at proper
contact level and contacting the adjacent tooth. Next,
observe the matrix from an occlusal aspect, and evaluate the position of the contact area in a faciolingual direction. It may be necessary to remove the retainer and
reburnish the band for additional contouring. Minor alterations in contour and contact may be accomplished
without removal from the tooth. The back side of the
blade of the 15-8-14 spoon excavator (i.e., Black spoon)
is an excellent instrument for improving both contour
and contact (see Fig. 17-93). If a smaller burnishing instrument is used, use care not to create a grooved or

17-78 Burnishing matrix band. A, With band on pad, use small burnisher to deform
band. B, Use large burnisher to smooth band contour. C, Burnished matrix band for MOD tooth
preparation.

FIG

17-79 Positioning band in Universal retainer. A, Explorer pointing
to locking vise. View is showing gingival side of vise. B, Pointed spindle
i s released from locking vise by turni ng small knurled nut counterclockwise. C, Fold band to form loop and
position in retainer (occlusal edge of
band first). D, Tighten spindle
against band in locking vise.

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

bumpy surface that will result in a restoration with an
irregular proximal surface. Ideally the band should be
positioned 1 mm apical to the gingival margin (or margins) or deep enough to be engaged by the wedge
( whichever is less) and 1 to 2 mm above the adjacent
marginal ridge or ridges.
A minor modification of the matrix may be indicated
for restoring the proximal surface that is planned for a
guide plane for a removable partial denture. Abutment
teeth for a tooth-supported removable partial denture
must provide amalgam contour to allow defining (by
carving or [later] disking) a guide plane extending from
the marginal ridge 2.5 mm gingivally (see Fig. 17-66, B).
However, normal proximal contour, rather than overcontour, is usually sufficient and best for development
of a guide plane. Guide plane development results in a
gingival embrasure between the natural tooth and denture teeth that is less open and less likely to trap food
(see Fig. 17-66, B).
Abutment teeth adjacent to the residual ridge for a
tissue-supported (i.e., distal extension) removable partial denture are carved to provide normal morphology.
Sufficient gingival embrasure should be provided to allow for the difference between the compression under
load of the ridge soft tissues and that of the periodontal
membrane (although a small area guide plane may be

provided). (Compare the embrasure in D to that in B in
Fig. 17-66, D.)
After the matrix contour and extension are evaluated,
place a wedge in the gingival embrasure or embrasures
using the following technique. Break off approximately
1/2 inch (1.2 cm) of a round toothpick. Grasp the broken
end of the wedge with the No. 110 pliers. Insert the
pointed tip from the lingual or facial embrasure
(whichever is larger), slightly gingival to the gingival
margin. Wedge the band tightly against the tooth and
margin (Fig. 17-82, A). If necessary, the gingival aspect
of the wedge may be lightly wetted with lubricant to facilitate its placement. If the wedge is placed occlusal to
the gingival margin, the band will be pressed into the
preparation, creating an abnormal concavity in the
proximal surface of the restoration (see Fig. 17-82, B).
The wedge should not be so far apical to the gingival
margin that the band will not be held tightly against the
gingival margin. This improper wedge placement will
result in gingival excess (i.e., "overhang") caused by the
band moving slightly away from the margin during
condensation of the amalgam. Such an overhang often
goes undetected and may result in irritation of the gingiva or an area of plaque accumulation. To be effective,
a wedge should be positioned as near to the gingival
margin as possible without being occlusal to it. If the
wedge is significantly apical of the gingival margin, a
second (usually smaller) wedge may be placed on top of

FIG 17-80

FIG

Band may be trimmed for the shallower gingival
margin, permitting matrix to extend farther gingivally for the
deeper gingival margin on the other proximal surface.

FIG 17-82

17-81 Using mirror from facial or lingual position to eval-

uate proximal contour of matrix band.

A, Correct wedge position. B, Incorrect wedge positions.

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

Various double-wedging techniques. A and B, Proper wedging for matrix for typical
MOD preparation. C and D, Technique to allow wedging near gingival margin of preparation
when proximal box is shallow gingivally or interproximal tissue level has receded or both. E and
F, Double wedging may be used with faciolingually wide proximal boxes to provide maximal
closure of band along gingival margin. G, Another technique may be used on the mesial aspect
of maxillary first premolars to adapt the matrix to the fluted (i.e., concave) area of the gingival
margin (G1,G2); G3, second wedge inserted from lingual embrasure; G4, testing adaptation of
band after insertion of wedges from facial.

FIG 17-83

C H A PT E R 17

the first to wedge adequately the matrix against the
margin (Fig. 17-83, C and D). This type of wedging is
particularly useful for patients whose interproximal tissue level has receded.
The gingival wedge should be tight enough to prevent any possibility of an overhang of amalgam in at
least the middle two thirds of the gingival margin (see
Fig. 17-83, A and B). Occasionally, double wedging is
permitted (if access allows), securing the matrix when
the proximal box is wide faciolingually. Double wedging refers to using two wedges: one from the lingual
embrasure and one from the facial embrasure (see Fig.
17-83, E and F). Two wedges help to ensure that the gingival corners of a wide proximal box can be properly
condensed; they also help to minimize gingival excess.
However, double wedging should be used only if the
middle two thirds of the proximal margins can be adequately wedged. Because the facial and lingual corners
are accessible to carving, proper wedging is important
to prevent gingival excess of amalgam in the middle
two thirds of the proximal box (see Fig. 17-8.3, B).
Occasionally, a concavity may be present on the proxi mal surface that is apparent in the gingival margin.
This may occur on a surface with a fluted root, such as
the mesial surface of the maxillary first premolar (see
Fig. 17-83, G1). A gingival margin located in this area
may be concave (see Fig. 17-83, G2). To wedge a matrix
band tightly against such a margin, a second pointed
wedge can be inserted between the first wedge and the
band. (see Fig. 17-83, G3 and G4).
The wedging action between the teeth should provide
enough separation to compensate for the thickness of
the matrix band. This will ensure a positive contact relationship after the matrix is removed (after the condensation and initial carving of the amalgam). If a Tofflemire retainer is used to restore a two-surface Class II
preparation, the single wedge must provide enough
separation to compensate for two thicknesses of band
material. Test for tightness of the wedge by pressing the
tip of an explorer firmly at several points along the middle two thirds of the gingival margin (against the matrix
band) to verify that it cannot be moved away from the
gingival margin (Fig. 17-84). While directing a gentle
stream of air, press and drag the tip of the explorer
along the gingival margin in both directions to ensure
the removal of any remaining friable enamel. As an additional test, attempt to remove the wedge (using the
explorer with moderate pressure) after first having set
the explorer tip into the wood near the broken end.
Moderate pulling should not cause dislodgement. Gingival overhangs of amalgam can inadvertently occur as
a result of wedges becoming loose during amalgam condensation. Therefore the clinician must assess and carve
this area carefully.
Often the rubber dam has a tendency to loosen the
wedge. Rebounding of the dam stretched by the wedge

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG 17-84 Use explorer tip (with pressure) to ensure proper
adaptation of the band to gingival margin. In addition, press
and drag the tip along gingival margin in both directions to
ensure removal of any friable enamel.
causes loosening. Stretching the interproximal dam
septa before and during wedge placement in the direction opposite to the wedge (and lubricating the wedge)
can prevent this. The stretched dam is released after the
wedge is inserted.
Some situations may require a triangular-shaped
wedge that can be modified (by knife or scalpel
blade) to conform to the approximating tooth contours
(Fig. 17-85). However, the round toothpick wedge is
usually the wedge of choice with conservative proximal
boxes because its wedging action is more occlusal (i.e.,
nearer the gingival margin) than with the triangular
wedge (Fig. 17-86, A and B).
The triangular (i.e., anatomic) wedge is recommended for a preparation with a deep gingival margin.
The triangular wedge is usually indicated with the Tofflemire MOD matrix band. The triangular wedge is positioned similarly to the round wedge, and the goal is
the same. When the gingival margin is deep (cervically),
the base of the triangular wedge will more readily engage the tooth gingival to the margin without causing
excessive soft-tissue displacement. The anatomic wedge
is preferred for deeply extended gingival margins because its greatest cross-sectional dimension is at its base
(see Fig. 17-86, C and D).
To maintain gingival isolation attained by an
anatomic wedge placed before the preparation of a
deeply extended gingival margin, it may be appropriate
to withdraw the wedge a small distance to allow passage of the band between the loosened wedge and the
gingival margin. Tilting (i.e., canting) the matrix into
place helps the gingival edge of the band slide between
the loosened wedge and gingival margin. The band is
then tightened and the same wedge is firmly reinserted.
Supporting the matrix material with the blade of a
Hollenback carver during the insertion of the wedge for
the difficult deep gingival restoration may be helpful.
The tip of the blade is placed between the matrix and
gingival margin, and then the "heel" of the blade is
leaned against the matrix and adjacent tooth (Fig. 17-87).

C H A PT E R

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 17-85 Modified triangular (i.e.,
anatomic) wedge. A, Depending on
proximal convexity, triangular wedge
may distort matrix contour. 8, A
sharp-bladed instrument may be
used to modify the triangular steepness of the wedge. C, Modified and
unmodified wedges compared. D,
Properly modified triangular wedge
prevents distortion of matrix contour.

FIG 17-86 Indications for round toothpick versus triangular (i.e., anatomic) wedges. A, As a rule, the triangular wedge will not firmly support the matrix band
against the gingival margin in conservative Class II
preparations (arrow). B, The round toothpick wedge
i s preferred with these preparations because its
wedging action is nearer the gingival margin. C, In
Class II preparations with deep gingival margins, the
round toothpick wedge will crimp the matrix band
contour if its diameter is above the gingival margin.
D, The triangular wedge is preferred with these
preparations because its greatest width is at its base.

CHAPTER 17

FIG . 17-87 Supporting matrix with blade of Hollenback carver
during wedge insertion.

In this position the blade supports the matrix to help
both in positioning the wedge sufficiently gingivally
and preventing the wedge from pushing the matrix into
the preparation. After the wedge is properly inserted,
the blade is gently removed.
Assess all aspects of the band and make any desired
corrections once the wedge is placed. Again, using a
mirror, inspect the proximal aspects of the matrix band
facially and lingually to verify that it contacts the adjacent tooth and that proper contour has been achieved.
Reflected light must not be seen in the contact area between the band and the adjacent tooth (see Fig. 17-81).
Carefully position the mirror to prevent a false impression of contact resulting from visual overlap of the band
and the adjacent tooth. If the band does not reach the
adjacent contact area or areas after contouring and
wedging, release the tension of the band a small amount
by turning the larger knurled nut of the Tofflemire retainer counterclockwise (many operators loosen the
band one-quarter turn to ensure proximal contact). If
loosening the loop of a Tofflemire band still does not allow for contact with an adjacent tooth, a custom-made
band with a smaller angle can be used. Reducing the
angle of the band increases the difference in length
(i.e., circumferences) of the gingival and occlusal edges.
To reduce the angle of the band, fold it as shown in
Fig. 17-88. Next, burnish for appropriate occlusogingival contour (in the contact areas), and insert the band
into the Tofflemire retainer. (To maximize the advantage
of either this custom band or the loosened Tofflemire
band, compound may be applied as described in the
next section.)
A suitably trimmed tongue blade can wedge a matrix
where the interproximal spacing between teeth is large
(Fig. 17-89). Occasionally, however, it is impossible to
use a wedge to secure the matrix band. In this case, the
band must be sufficiently tight to minimize the gingival
excess of amalgam. Because the band is not wedged,
special care must be exercised by placing small amounts
of amalgam in the gingival floor and condensing the
first 1 mm of amalgam lightly, but thoroughly, in a gin-

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG 17-88 Custom-made matrix strip is folded as indicated
by arrows. The smaller angle (a) compared with angle of commercial strip increases difference between length of gingival
and occlusal edges.

FIG

17-89 Custom-made tongue blade wedge may be used
when excessive space exists between adjacent teeth.
gival direction. Next, carefully continue condensation in
a gingival direction using a larger condenser with firm
pressure. Condensation against an unwedged matrix
may cause the amalgam to extrude grossly beyond the
gingival margin. (Obviously, without a wedge there will
be some excess amalgam at the proximal margins that
will be overcontoured, requiring correction by a suitable
carver immediately after matrix removal.)
An advantage of amalgam over direct composite is
that amalgam is condensed into place rather than
packed or placed. Condensation strokes in a gingival direction help to ensure that no voids occur internally or
along the margins. Condensation laterally helps to ensure that sufficient proximal contact and proximal contour are achieved. With direct composite, there is less
potential to move the band laterally during packing or
placement. Therefore proximal contact and contour
must be ensured using the matrix band and wedge.
The matrix is removed after insertion of the amalgam,
carving of the occlusal portion (including the occlusal
embrasure or embrasures), and hardening of the amalgam to avoid fracture of the marginal ridge during band
removal. Remove the retainer from the band after turning the small knurled nut counterclockwise to retract
the pointed spindle. The end of the index finger may be

C H A PT E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

placed on the occlusal surface of the tooth to stabilize
the band as the retainer is removed. Next, remove any
compound that was applied to support the matrix. Use
the No. 110 pliers to tease the band free from one contact
area at a time by pushing or pulling the band in a linguoocclusal (or facioocclusal) direction and, if possible,
in the direction of wedge insertion (Fig. 17-90). Some
operators prefer to leave the wedge or wedges in place

FIG . 17-90 Using No. 110 pliers, the matrix band should be
removed in a linguoocclusal (arrow) or facioocclusal direction
( not just in an occlusal direction).

FIG

to provide separation of the teeth while the matrix band
is removed. By maintaining slight interdental separation, the wedge reduces the possibility of the amalgam
fracturing. Avoid a straight occlusal direction during
matrix removal to prevent breaking the marginal ridges.
Remove the wedge or wedges, and complete the carving procedures (as described in a later section).
Compound-Supported Matrix. The compoundsupported matrix is rarely used, but it is an alternative
to the Universal matrix. A wedged matrix supported by
compound provides most of the essential qualities of a
good matrix, especially when used for two-surface
proximal restorations." It is more rigid than commercial
matrices, provides better contact and contour, is virtually trouble-free during proper removal, requires very
little proximal carving after the matrix removal, and
only has one thickness of band material for which
wedging must compensate.
Using -/,,-inch (8-mm) wide, 0.002-inch (0.05-mm)
thick stainless steel matrix material, cut a length sufficient to cover one third of the facial surface and extend
through the prepared proximal surface to cover one
third of the lingual surface. To prevent the matrix material from impinging on the facial and lingual gingiva,
trim the gingival edge as shown in Fig. 17-91, A. Note
that the remaining untrimmed gingival edge is longer

17-91 Compound-supported matrix. A, Shape of stainless steel strip after trimming.
B, Strip contoured to circumferential contour of tooth (fingers can be used). C, Burnishing the
strip to produce occlusogingival contact contour (left and right arrows indicate short back-and
forth motion of burnisher). D, Contoured strip in position. E, Matrix strip properly wedged. F,
Completed compound-supported matrix.

CHAPTER

17

than the length of the gingival margin of the tooth
preparation. With contouring pliers or fingers, contour
the strip to conform to the circumferential contour of the
tooth (see Fig. 17-91, B and D). When contouring with
pliers, exercise care to produce a smoothly curved surface. Contour the strip occlusogingivally with the eggshaped burnisher using a short back-and-forth motion
(see arrows) (see Fig. 17-91, C). This is best accomplished
with the strip laid on a resilient paper pad, which provides a yielding surface. Burnish with sufficient pressure to shape the steel strip to the desired contact
contour. Contours vary both faciolingually and occlusogingivally because some teeth are more bulbous than
others. Once the matrix band is in place and the contour
verified, the appropriate interproximal wedge is inserted (see Fig. 17-91, E) and compound application is
begun.
There are seven steps for applying low-fusing compound:
1. Soften a piece of low-fusing compound in a Bunsen
flame.

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

2. Shape into a cone.
3. Slightly glaze the base by a quick pass through the
edge of the flame.
4. Attach the base to the end of the appropriate gloved
forefinger.
5. Glaze the tip of the cone by passing it through the
side of the flame (Fig. 17-92, A).
6. Immediately press the softened tip into the facial (or
lingual) embrasure formed by the matrix and adjacent
tooth, forcing the compound into the gingival embrasure (into whichever side the wedge was inserted).
7. See that some of the compound is extended against
the facial (lingual) surfaces of the operated tooth
(past the edge of the matrix) and adjacent tooth (see
Fig. 17-92, B).
These steps, except for the softening of the compound,
should take only a few seconds. Now repeat this application of compound for the opposite side (i.e., the side
showing the tip of the wedge) (see Fig. 17-92, C). Compound cones can be prepared in advance and stored for
later use to save time during matrix application.

FIG 17-92 Compound-supported matrix. A, Glazing tip of compound cone. B, Compound applied facially. C, Compound applied lingually. D, Stability of matrix ensured by uniting facial
and lingual compound with additional compound over the occlusal surface of adjacent tooth.

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

With experience, making and placing compound
cones requires very little time. When these compound
cones are manipulated correctly, the consistency of the
base portion (somewhat soft and moldable) forces the
more fluid tip portion into the gingival embrasure and
then out over half of the facial (or lingual) surfaces of
the teeth. Practice is required to achieve the correct consistency and placement of the compound. An experienced operator may apply both facial and lingual cones
simultaneously (i.e., one cone attached to the thumb
and the other to the index finger). Compound softened
and applied as described, will stick securely to clean,
dry, tooth surfaces. However it is applied, the compound, if adapted properly to the facial and lingual
tooth surfaces, enhances stability. Do not allow compound to encroach on the occlusal surface of the matrixed tooth or on the adjacent marginal ridge of the
tooth that will be forming the proximal contact with the
restoration. A common error is to apply too much compound, which results in a bulky matrix that is occasionally loosened by movements of the tongue or cheek or
by the flexing of the rubber dam. Optionally, stability of
the matrix may be by uniting the facial and lingual compound by adding compound over the occlusal surfaces
of adjacent teeth (not over the adjacent marginal ridge)
(see Figs. 17-91, F, and 17-92, D). Harden the compound
by cooling with a stream of air.
If proper contact and contour are not established initially, they can be corrected. A unique property of the
compound-supported matrix is its ability to respond to
needed change in contour by the application of a warm
burnishing instrument (i.e., the back of a 15-8-14 spoon
excavator) pressed against the band from the preparation side (Fig. 17-93). This step should be routine to assure the operator that the compound has not moved the
matrix away from the adjacent tooth. As warmth from
the instrument is transferred readily through the metal
strip to soften the compound immediately adjacent to
the strip, a burnishing movement of the instrument
with moderate pressure confirms (by tactile feel through
the instrument) the contact of the strip against the adja-

cent tooth. A small amount of compound often exudes
occlusal to the contact to reveal that compound was (but
is no longer) between the strip and adjacent tooth. Do
not release the pressure against the strip until the instrument, strip, and compound have been cooled with
an air syringe. The shape of the matrix band against
which the amalgam will be condensed determines the
proximal contour. It is much easier, as well as more efficient and effective, to establish proper contours in the
matrix before amalgam condensation rather than in the
amalgam after matrix removal.
Two features of proximal surface contour should be
considered. One feature is the normal slight convexity
between the occlusal and middle thirds of the proximal surface when viewed from the lingual (or facial) aspect. Correct and incorrect contours are illustrated in
Fig. 17-94, A through C. Proximal surface restorations
often display an occlusogingival proximal contour that
is too straight, whereupon the contact relationship is
located too far occlusally (with little or no occlusal embrasure) (see Fig. 17-94, C). This condition allows food

FIG . 17-93 Contour of compound-supported matrix may be
altered by applying warm burnishing instrument against band
from preparation side.

FIG . 17-94 Proximal contour. A, Correct proximal contour. B, Incorrect marginal ridge height
and occlusal embrasure form. C, Occlusogingival proximal contour too straight, contact too
high, and incorrect occlusal embrasure form.

C H A P T E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

impaction between the teeth with resultant injury to the
interproximal gingiva and supporting tissues, and it invites caries.
The second feature of proximal surface contour is alteration of the matrix, when indicated, to provide the
correct form to the proximofacial line angle region
(Fig. 17-95). This feature can be provided to the matrix
with a warm burnishing instrument. This contour feature may be present already if the first shaping of the
matrix was correct before placement of the compound.
If this contour is not present, the facial embrasure of the
restoration will be too open, inviting food impaction
and injury to underlying supporting tissues.
The matrix should be tight against the facial and lingual margins on the proximal surface so that the amalgam can be well condensed at the preparation margins.
In addition, when the matrix is tight against the tooth,
minimal carving is necessary on the proximal margins
after the matrix is removed. However, it must be emphasized that a matrix, which is tight against the margins, requires thorough condensation of the amalgam
into the matrix and tooth corners to prevent amalgam
voids at the proximal margins.
As a last step before condensation, press and drag the
tip of an explorer tine along the gingival margin in both
directions to loosen and displace any weak portions of
enamel (see Figs. 17-83, G4, and 17-84). Use the air syringe to clear all debris from the preparation, and
recheck the matrix for correctness.
Removing the compound-supported matrix follows
condensation of the amalgam and carving the occlusal
surface, especially the occlusal embrasure (subjects described in a later section). First, break away the compound from the facial and lingual surfaces with a stiff
explorer tine. Carefully loosen and remove any compound remaining in the gingival embrasure (Fig. 17-96).
Assuming the wedge was inserted from the lingual,
grasp (with No. 110 pliers) the facial edge of the matrix and remove it facially until free of the contact
(Fig. 17-97). Otherwise, matrix removal is the same as
described previously.
Precontoured Matrix Strips. Commercially available metal strips (e.g., Palodent Matrix System, Darway

Inc., San Mateo, CA) are precontoured and ready for application to the tooth (Fig. 17-98). Palodent strips have
limited application because of their very rounded contour. They usually are most suitable for mandibular first
premolars and the distal surface of maxillary canines.
The contact area of the adjacent tooth occasionally is too
close to allow placement of the contoured Palodent strip
without causing a dent in the strip's contact area, making it unusable.
As stated previously, position the steel strip (see Fig.
17-91, D and E), and carefully insert the gingival edge

FIG . 17-95 Alteration of matrix contour to provide correct

FIG

form to proximofacial line angle region.

strips.

FIG . 17-96 Carefully remove any compound remaining in gingival embrasure (arrow) before matrix removal.

FIG

17-97 Remove metal strip of compound-supported matrix by pulling it facially.

17-98 Commercially manufactured, precontoured metal

C H A PT E R

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

less of circumference (Fig. 17-100). The bands vary in
height from 3/16 to 5/6 inch (4.7 to 7.9 mm) and are supplied in two thicknesses (0.0015 inch [0.038 mm] and
0.002 inch [0.05 mm]). The indicated use of this matrix is
for extensive Class II preparations, especially those replacing two or more cusps. As with all matrix systems,
it has advantages and disadvantages. One advantage is
that the auto-lock loop can be positioned either on the
facial or lingual surface with equal ease. A disadvantage
is that the bands are not precontoured, and development of physiologic proximal contours is difficult. (For
a more complete description of the Automatrix and its
use, see Chapter 19.)
I nserting and Carving the Amalgam
Condensation. As stated previously,

the principal
objectives during insertion of amalgam are:

17-99 Correct or incorrect facial and lingual embrasure
form is determined by the shape of the matrix strip.

• Condensation to adapt the amalgam to the preparation walls and matrix and to produce a restoration
free of voids
• Having as low as possible mercury content in the
restoration to improve strength and decrease corrosion

into the gingival crevice about 1 mm apical to the gingival margin. The occlusal edge of the strip should extend
1 to 2 mm occlusal to the adjacent marginal ridge. Visually inspect the occlusogingival contour of the strip. Occasionally the strip cannot be properly evaluated until
after placing the gingival wedge to stabilize it.
It may be necessary to remove the strip for reburnishing when the contour is incorrect. When the contour is
appropriate, insert the strip, and (using a mirror) evaluate the matrix from the lingual (or facial) and occlusal
embrasures for correctness. (Fig. 17-91, E, illustrates the
correct occlusogingival contour.) The strip should be
shaped so that proper facial and lingual embrasure
form will be established after compound application
(Fig. 17-99). If these embrasures are too open, food impaction and injury to underlying tissues may occur; if
too closed with a broad contact, proper scouring by
food movement or by the toothbrush is hindered.
Position the gingival wedge interproximally (see
Fig. 17-91, E) to secure the band tightly at the gingival
margin to prevent an excess of amalgam (i.e., "overhang"). The wedge also separates the teeth slightly to
compensate for the thickness of the band material. Variations in wedge design and details on wedge placement,
including tests for tightness, are the same as described
previously The application of compound is occasionally
indicated with this matrix system to develop proper
proximal contacts, proximal contours, embrasure form,
and stability (i.e., rigidity) (see Figs. 17-91, F, and 17-92, D).
Automatrix. The Automatrix (Dentsply Caulk, Milford,
Delaware) is a retainerless matrix system with four
types of bands that are designed to fit all teeth, regard-

Choose condensers that are best suited for use in each
part of the tooth preparation and that can be used without binding. Remember that condensation of amalgam
with spherical particles requires larger condensers than
are commonly used for admixed amalgam, because
spherical amalgam is initially easier to condense and admixed amalgam requires more condensation pressure.
Fill the amalgam carrier, and transfer into the proximal portion of the tooth preparation only the amount
of amalgam that (when condensed) will fill the gingival 1 mm (approximately) of the proximal box. Condense the amalgam along the gingival floor with the
previously selected condenser. Use the condenser in a
gingival direction with sufficient force to adapt the
amalgam to the gingival floor. Next, carefully condense the amalgam against the proximal margins of
the preparation and into the proximal retention
grooves. Firm, facially and lingually directed pressure
(i.e., lateral condensation) of the condenser accomplishes this at the same time as exertion of gingivally
directed force (Fig. 17-101). Also in the proximal box,
condense mesially (or distally) to ensure proximal contact with the adjacent tooth. Lateral condensation
should be a routine step for Class II amalgams.
Continue the procedure of adding amalgam and condensing until the amalgam reaches the level of the pulpal wall. Change condensers (usually to a larger one), if
indicated, and condense amalgam in the remaining
proximal portion of the preparation concurrently with
the occlusal portion. It may be necessary to return to a
smaller condenser when condensing in a narrow extension of the preparation or near the proximal margins.
Remember that a smaller condenser face is more effec-

FIG

CHAPTER

FIG .

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

11

17-100

Automatrix system.

be accomplished in 3 to 4 minutes (depending on the
alloy). Otherwise, crystallization of the new amalgam
matrix in the unused portion will be too advanced to
permit:
17-101
Lateral and occlusogingival force is necessary to
properly condense amalgam
i nto proximal locks and into angles at junction of matrix band
with margins of preparation.
FIG

tive at condensing as long as it does not significantly
penetrate the amalgam. Because the area of a circular
condenser face increases by the square of the diameter,
doubling the diameter will require four times more
force for the same pressure on a unit area.
When the occlusal margins are approached, exercise
care not to injure the enamel margins. However, exert
maximal pressure with the hand condenser as the occlusal margins are covered and overpacked by at least
1 mm. A slight rocking motion of the condenser may assist in condensation. Using a large condenser, make sure
that the occlusal margins are well condensed.
Condensation should be completed within the working time for the alloy being used. Condensation should

Proper coherence and homogeneity with minimal
voids in the restoration
Desired adaptation of the material to the walls of the
preparation and matrix during condensation
Development of the maximal strength and minimal
flow (i.e., creep) in the completed restoration
Proper intermingling of the adhesive and amalgam if
a bonding system is used
Therefore, when inserting amalgam into large preparations and the mix is nearing 3 minutes old, a new mix
should be made. While condensing, the operator should
monitor the plasticity and wetness of the amalgam
mass. To allow proper condensation, the mix should be
neither wet (i.e., mercury rich) nor dry and crumbly
(i.e., mercury poor).
Pneumatic, or mechanical, condensation may be
used, but it has three distinct disadvantages. One disadvantage of the pneumatic condenser is the possibility of
damaging the enamel margins with the condenser
points. A second disadvantage is the risk of inadequate
condensation in conservative tooth preparations. A
third disadvantage is patient objection to the constant
pneumatic tamping. (Refer to Conservative Class I
Amalgam Restorations for a discussion of mercury hygiene and amalgam selection and trituration.)

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG

17-103

Define marginal ridge and occlusal embrasure

with explorer.

FIG . 17-102 Precarve burnish with large burnisher.
Carving the Occlusal Portion. Before carving procedures are initiated, precarve burnishing of the occlusal
portion with a large egg-shaped or ball burnisher
should be done (Fig. 17-102). As mentioned previously,
precarve burnishing may be used as a form of condensation. (Refer to Conservative Class I Amalgam Restorations for a description of the technique.)
Use pressure similar to the force used when condensing the amalgam. Move the burnisher mesiodistally and
faciolingually until it contacts the enamel surfaces external to the margins. Burnishing should not continue
after this because some amalgam should remain for
carving procedures. Precarve burnishing enhances the
benefits of condensation. 54
With the matrix band still in place, careful carving of
the occlusal portion should begin immediately after
condensation and burnishing. Sharp discoid instruments of suitable size are recommended carvers. Use
the larger discoid first, followed by the smaller in regions not accessible to the larger instrument.
While the matrix is in place, carve the marginal ndge confluent with the tooth's anatomy and duplicate the height
and shape of the adjacent marginal ridge (Fig. 17-103). Use
an explorer or small Hollenback carver to carefully define (i.e., open) the occlusal embrasure. This step will
significantly reduce the danger of marginal ridge fracture during matrix removal.
Recall that occlusal contacts were evaluated before
tooth preparation. Remembering the pattern of occlusal
contacts, observing the height of the adjacent marginal
ridge, and knowing where the preparation cavosurface
margins are located will aid the operator in completing
carving of the occlusal surface, including the marginal
ridge and occlusal embrasure.
If the restoration has extensive axial involvement of
the tooth, the occlusal carving should be accomplished
quickly. The objectives would be to develop the general
occlusal contour but most importantly to develop the

FIG

17-104

Gingival excess may be removed with amalgam

knives.

correct marginal ridge height and occlusal embrasure
form (see Fig. 17-103). Then the matrix is removed and
access gained to carve the axial portions of the restoration. This permits these areas (usually more inaccessible) to be carved while the amalgam is carvable. Once
the axial carving is completed, the occlusal surface contouring is completed. Occasionally this may require the
use of an abrasive stone or finishing bur if the amalgam
has set.
Removal of the Matrix Band and Completion of
Carving. As previously described, depending on the
type of matrix used, remove the compound or the matrix retainer or both, and remove the matrix band (or
strip) and any wedges. The proximal surface should be
nearly completed, with proper contact evident and minimal carving required except to remove a possible small
amount of excess amalgam at the proximal facial and
lingual margins at the faciogingival and linguogingival
corners and along the gingival margin. The amalgam
knives (scalers, No. 34 and No. 35) (Fig. 17-104) are ideal
for removing gingival excess preventing gingival overhangs. They are also ideal for refining embrasure form
around the proximal contacts. Recall that the secondary
(or "back") edges on the blades of the amalgam knives

C H A P T E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 17-105 Removal of gingival excess of amalgam. A, Excess of amalgam (arrow) at gingival
corner of restoration. B, Use of amalgam knife for removal of gingival excess. C, Gingival corner of restoration with excess removed.

are occasionally helpful, using either a pull or push
stroke. The Hollenback carver No. 3 or (occasionally)
the side of the explorer may be suitable instruments for
carving these areas. However, the explorer cannot refine
the margins and contour as accurately as amalgam
knives.
When carving the margins, the cutting surface of the
carving instrument is held perpendicular to the margins. However, carving should be parallel to the margins using the tooth surface adjacent to the margin to
guide the carver. If appreciable excess is present at the
gingival margin or if the excess has set sufficiently, remove it with the amalgam knives (Fig. 17-105). Verify
that the proximal contact exists by placing a mouth mirror lingual or facial to the contact and view it indirectly.
It may be necessary to rotate the mirror slightly to ensure that the adjacent teeth are, in fact, in contact. No
light should be seen between them.
If an amalgam adhesive was used, look for thin layers
of set resin near the margin that formed between the matrix and the tooth. These are occasionally referred to as
"barnacles" because they are very tenacious and difficult
to remove even with amalgam knives. They are also difficult to see because they are often transparent. Barnacles, or adhesive excess, may be minimized by lightly applying adhesive to the tooth preparation before
condensing the amalgam. Overapplication of amalgam
adhesive increases the potential for barnacle formation.
This is important because removing tenaciously bondedand-set resin from a margin immediately adjacent to
freshly carved amalgam that is relatively soft and carvable without damaging the amalgam is a challenge.
On the proximal surface where a guide plane is
planned for a removable partial denture, do not overcarve the surface extending from the marginal ridge
2.5 mm gingivally. Development of normal tooth contour before defining the guide plane is usually the best
procedure.

Once the carving is completed, the rubber dam is removed and the occlusion assessed. While removing the
rubber dam, because of the possibility of fracturing the
newly condensed restoration if the restoration is "high,"
advise the patient not to close until instructed to do so.
Insert articulating paper over the quadrant of teeth in
question, instruct the patient to close slowly and lightly
and to stop closing when the teeth barely touch. Once
the patient has reopened and the articulating paper is
removed, look for two features of the occlusal relationship suggesting the restoration is high:
1. Cusp tips of the adjacent teeth are not in occlusal contact with certain mated areas, when it is known from
the preoperative occlusal assessment that they
should be touching.
2. A cusp that occludes with the new restoration contacts prematurely. For example, if a marginal ridge of
the restoration is high, reduce the area contacting
prematurely.
Observing the space (short of touching) between certain occlusally mated surfaces of nearby teeth indicates
how much to reduce when carving. For example, if
these opposing surfaces are 0.5 mm apart (estimating by
eyesight), then reduce the high marginal ridge (or other
area) by approximately that amount. This expedites occlusal adjustment, as compared with making an insufficient, shallower carving adjustment and then having to
repeat closure and carving numerous times. After making the first occlusal adjustment, repeat the sequence of
closure, observation, and carving until the appropriate
surfaces of the opposing teeth are touching. When carving for occlusion, attempt to establish stable centric contacts of cusps (maximal intercuspation) to opposing surfaces that are perpendicular to occlusal forces. Occlusal
contacts located on a cuspal incline or ridge slope are
undesirable, because they cause a deflective force on the

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

tooth and should be adjusted until the resulting contact
is stable (i.e., the force vector of centric occlusal contacts
should parallel the long axis of the tooth).
Until now the patient has been instructed to close
only from a hinge and axis relationship (i.e., centric occlusion or maximal intercuspation). After placing the articulating paper over the tooth, now ask the patient to
lightly close the teeth and to lightly slide them from side
to side. After removing the paper, evaluate the occlusion
and make any necessary adjustments (see Fig. 17-23).
These should be small if the previous carving has been
correct. Any contact area can be recognized on the amalgam by the depth of color imparted by the paper (and
especially if the colored area has a silvery center). Reduce the deeper-colored or shiny-centered areas until all
markings are uniformly of a light hue (and with no
shiny centers) and contacts are noted on adjacent teeth.
Guard against overcarving the restoration into infraocclusion, especially in the area of centric-holding contacts. Before the patient is dismissed, thin dental floss
may be passed through the proximal contacts one time
to remove any amalgam shavings on the proximal surface of the restoration and assess the gingival margin.
Passing the floss through a contact more than once may
weaken it. The floss is wrapped around the adjacent
tooth when passed through the contact, minimizing the
pressure exerted on the amalgam. Once positioned in
the gingival embrasure, the floss is wrapped around the
restored tooth and positioned apical to the gingival
margin of the restoration. The floss is moved in a faciolingual direction while extended occlusally. The floss
not only removes amalgam shaving, but it also
smoothes the proximal amalgam and detects any amalgam gingival overhang. If an overhang is detected, further use of the amalgam knives is necessary. Floss can

FIG

also be used to verify that the weight of the contact is
similar to that of the neighboring teeth. When carving is
completed, rinse and evacuate all debris from the
mouth. Caution the patient not to use the new restoration for biting or chewing for a few hours.
Finishing and Polishing the Amalgam. Finishing of
amalgam restorations may be necessary to correct a
marginal discrepancy or improve the contour. However,
evidence suggests that polishing of high-copper amalgams is unnecessary. 58 Although, they are less prone to
corrosion and marginal deterioration than their lowcopper predecessors, some operators still prefer to polish amalgam restorations. Finishing (and polishing) is
usually delayed until all proposed restorations have
been placed, rather than being done periodically during
the course of treatment. Polishing an amalgam restoration is not attempted within 24 hours after insertion because crystallization is not complete.
Finishing and polishing the occlusal portion is similar
to the procedures described for the Class I amalgam
restoration (see Fig. 17-24). Finishing and polishing of
the proximal surface is indicated where the proximal
amalgam is accessible. This usually includes the facial
and lingual margins and the amalgam occlusal to the
contact. The remainder of the proximal surface is often
inaccessible; however, the matrix band should have imparted sufficient smoothness to it.
If the amalgam along the facial and lingual proximal
margins was slightly overcarved, the enamel margin
can be felt as the explorer tip passes from amalgam
across the margin onto the external enamel surface.
When this occurs (and where the proximal amalgam is
accessible), use sandpaper discs, rotating at slow speed,
to smooth the enamel-and-amalgam margin. Sandpaper
discs can also be used to smooth and contour the mar-

17-106 Polished MO amalgam restoration. Note conservative extension. A, Occlusal view.
B, Mesiofacial and occlusal views of mesiofacial margin. C, Facial and occlusal views of proximal surface contour and location of proximal contact.

CHAPTER

17

ginal ridge. However, inappropriate use of sandpaper
discs may "ledge" the restoration around the contact,
resulting in inappropriate proximal contours.
In very conservative preparations the facial and lingual proximal margins are generally inaccessible for finishing and polishing. However, fine abrasive discs or
the tip of sharpened rubber polishing points should be
used to polish the proximal portion that is accessible.
When proximal margins are inaccessible to finishing
and polishing with discs or rubber polishing points and
there is some excess amalgam (such as at the gingival
corners and margins), the amalgam knives may occasionally be used to trim the amalgam back to the margin
and to improve the contour. Such light surfacing can
produce a smooth surface.
Some polishing techniques include the use of dental
tape with a polishing agent on the proximal surface.
With the polishing agent applied to the facial and lingual embrasures, pass dental tape through the contact.
Then press and slide the tape sideways in both directions several times against the proximal surface gingival
to the contact. Exercise care not to traumatize the soft
tissue. Accessible facial and lingual proximal margins
may also be polished using the edge of an abrasive
rubber-polishing cup.
Final polishing of the occlusal surface and accessible
areas of the proximal surface may be accomplished
with a fine-grit rubber polishing point or by the rubber
cup with flour of pumice followed by a high-luster
agent, such as precipitated chalk. Fig. 17-106 illustrates
examples of properly finished and polished amalgam
restorations.
QUADRANT DENTISTRY
When several teeth are to be restored, experienced dentists usually treat them by quadrants rather than individually. Quadrant dentistry implies more efficiency for
the dentist and less chair time for the patient. The use of
the rubber dam is particularly important in quadrant

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

dentistry. For maximal efficiency, when a quadrant of
amalgam tooth preparations is planned, each rotary or
hand instrument should be used on every tooth where
it is needed before being exchanged.
When restoring a quadrant of Class 11 amalgam tooth
preparations, it is permissible to apply matrix bands on
alternate preparations in the quadrant and restore the
teeth two at a time. Banding adjacent preparations requires excessive wedging to compensate for a double
thickness of band material and makes the control of
proximal contours and interproximal contacts very difficult. Extensive tooth preparations may need to be
restored one at a time. If proximal boxes differ in size,
teeth with smaller boxes should be restored first, because often the proximal margins are inaccessible to
carving if the larger adjacent box is restored first. In addition, smaller boxes can be more quickly and accurately restored, because more tooth structure remains
to guide the carver. If the larger proximal box is
restored first, there is risk of damaging the gingival
contour of the restoration when the wedge is inserted
to secure the matrix band for the second, smaller
restoration. If the adjacent proximal boxes are similar in
size, start the banding of alternate preparations with a
most posterior preparation, because this allows the patient to close slightly as subsequent restorations are inserted(Fig. 17-107).
Before restoring the second of two adjacent teeth, the
operator should carefully establish the proximal contour of the first restoration (the first half of each interproximal contact). Its anatomy will serve as the guide to
establish proper contact size and location of the second
restoration; it will also serve as good embrasure form. If
necessary, a finishing strip can be used to refine the contour of the first proximal amalgam contour (Fig. 17-108).
However, the finishing strip is indicated only where the
proximal contact is open. Using a finishing strip between contacting amalgam restorations may lighten or
eliminate the proximal contact.

FIG

17-107 Quadrant dentistry. Unless otherwise indicated, a
quadrant of Class II preparations with similarly sized proximal
boxes can be restored using two bands simultaneously if they
are placed on every other prepared tooth. It is recommended
to restore the most posterior tooth first.

C H A P T E R 17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG 17-108 When the first of two adjacent Class II preparations is
restored, proper contour can be established using a finishing and
contouring strip before restoring the second. A, Before using the
strip. B, Applying the strip. C, Verification of proper contour can be
achieved by viewing the restoration with a mirror from the occlusal,
facial, and lingual positions. Proximal contour can also be evaluated
after matrix placement by noting the symmetry between the restored surface and the burnished matrix band.

CLASS VI AMALGAM
RESTORATIONS

The Class VI tooth preparation is used to restore the
incisal edge of anterior teeth or the cusp tip regions of
the posterior teeth. Such tooth preparations are frequently indicated where attrition (loss of tooth substance from the occluding of food, abrasives, and opposing teeth) has removed the enamel to expose the
underlying dentin on those areas (Fig. 17-109, A). Such
a wear pattern occurs more often in geriatric patients.
Once the softer dentin is exposed, it wears faster than
the surrounding enamel, resulting in "cupped-out" areas. As the dentin support is lost, the enamel begins to
fracture away, exposing more dentin and often causing
sensitivity. Sensitivity to hot and cold is a frequent complaint with Class VI lesions, and some patients are bothered by food impaction in the deeper depressions.
Enamel edges may become jagged and sharp to the
tongue, lips, or cheek. Lip, tongue, or cheek biting is occasionally a complaint. Rounding and smoothing such
incisoaxial (or occlusoaxial) edges is an excellent service
to the patient. Early recognition and restoration of these
lesions is recommended to limit the loss of dentin and
the subsequent loss of enamel supported by this dentin.
The Class VI tooth preparation also is indicated to restore the hypoplastic pit occasionally found on cusp tips
(Fig. 17-110). Such developmental faults are vulnerable
to caries, especially in high-risk patients, and should be
restored as soon as they are detected. Rarely is caries
found in the dentin where attritional wear has removed
the overlying enamel.
Composite is generally used to restore Class VI
preparations. Amalgam may be selected for posterior
Class VI preparations because of its wear resistance and
longevity. Moisture control for Class VI restorations is

FIG 17-109 Class VI preparation. A, Exposed dentin on
mesiofacial cusp. B, Tooth preparation necessary to restore involved area.

FIG 17-110 Class VI lesions. Carious cusp tip fault on first
premolar (a). Noncarious fault on second premolar •b).

CHAPTER

17

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

FIG 17-111 Clinical examples of long-term amalgam restorations. A, 44-year-old amalgams.
B, 58-year-old amalgams in the first molar. C, 65-year-old amalgams in molars. (A and B, Courtesy of Drs. John Osborne and James Summitt.)

usually achieved with cotton roll isolation. For Class VI
amalgam preparations, enter the area with a small tapered fissure bur (e.g., No. 169L) and extend to a sufficient size to place the cavosurface margin on enamel
that has sound dentin support (see Fig. 17-109, B). The
preparation walls may need to diverge occlusally to ensure a 90-degree cavosurface margin. A depth of 1.5 mm
is sufficient to provide bulk of material for strength. Retention of the restoration is ensured by the creation of
small undercuts along the internal line angles. Be careful not to remove dentin that is immediately supporting
the enamel. Conservative tooth preparation is particularly important with Class VI preparations because it is
easy to undermine enamel on incisal edges and cusp
tips. Inserting, carving, and polishing are similar to procedures described for Class I tooth preparations for
amalgam.
Some older patients have excessive occlusal wear of
most of the teeth in the form of large concave areas with
much exposed dentin. Teeth with excessive wear may
require indirect restorations.
SUMMARY
Class I and II amalgam restorations are still common
procedures performed by general dentists. Class VI
amalgam restorations are used infrequently. It is important for practitioners to understand the indications, advantages, techniques, and limitations of these restorations. When used correctly and in properly selected
cases, they have demonstrated the potential to serve for
many years (Fig. 17-111).
REFERENCES
1. Almquist TC, Cowan RD, Lambert RL: Conservative amalgam restorations, J Prosthet Dent 29(5):524, 1973.
2. Anusavice KJ, editor: Phillips'science of dental materials, ed 10,
St Louis, 1996, Mosby.
3. Bader JD, Shugars DA: Variations in dentists' clinical decisions, J Public Health Dent 55(3):181, 1995.
4. Bauer JG: A study of procedures for burnishing amalgam
restorations, J Prosthet Dent 57(6):669, 1987.

5. Ben-Amar A: Reduction of microleakage around new amalgam restorations, J Am Dent Assoc 119(6):725, 1989.
6. Berry TG, Laswell HR Osborne Jw, Gale EN: Width of isthmus and marginal failure of restorations of amalgam, Oper
Dent 6(2):55, 1981.
7. Bjertness E, Sonju T: Survival analysis of amalgam restorations in long-term recall patients, Acta Odontol Scand
48(2):93, 1990.
8. Browning WD, Johnson WW, Gregory PN: Clinical performance of bonded amalgam restorations at 42 months, J Am
Dent Assoc 131(5):607, 2000.
9. Burgess JO: Dental materials for the restorations of root surfaces caries, Am J Dent 8(6):342, 1995.
10. Collins CJ, Bryant RW: Finishing of amalgam restorations: a
three-year clinical study, J Dent 20(4):202, 1992.
11. Council on Dental Materials, Instruments, and Equipment:
Dental mercury hygiene: summary of recommendations in
1990, J Am Dent Assoc 122(8):112, 1991.
12. Crockett WD, Shepard FE, Moon PC, Creal AF: The influence
of proximal retention grooves on the retention and resistance
of class II preparations for amalgam, JAm DentAssoc 91(5):1053,
1975.
13. de Morais PM, Rodrigues AL Jr, Pimenta LA: Quantitative
microleakage evaluation around amalgam restorations with
different treatments on cavity walls, Oper Dent 24(4):217,1999.
14. Della Bona A, Summitt JB: The effect of amalgam bonding on
resistance form of class II amalgam restorations, Quintessence
Int 29(2):95, 1998.
15. Dilley DC et al: Time required for placement of composite
versus amalgam restorations, J Dent Child 57(3):177, 1990.
16. Downer MC et al: How long do routine restorations last? A
systematic review. Br Dent J 187(8):432, 1999.
17. Drummond JL et al: Surface roughness of polished amalgams, Oper Dent 17(4):129, 1992.
18. Duncalf WV, Wilson NHF: Adaptation and condensation of
amalgam restorations in Class II preparations of conventional
and conservative design, Quintessence Int 23(7):499, 1992.
19. Eakle WS, Staninec W: Retrospective study of bonded amalgam restorations, J Dent Res 78:445, 1999 (abstract).
20. Eakle WS, Staninec M, Lacy AM: Effect of bonded amalgam
on the fracture resistance of teeth, J Prosthet Dent 68(2):257,
1992.
21. el-Badrawy WA: Cuspal deflection of maxillary premolars restored with bonded amalgam, Oper Dent 24(6):337,1999.
22. Eliades G, Palaghias G: In-vitro characterization of visible-lightcured glass-ionomer liners, Dent Mater 9(3):198, 1993.

CHAPTER 1)

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

23. Fusayama T: Two layers of carious dentin: diagnosis and treatment, Oper Dent 4(2): 63, 1979.
24. Gilmore HW: Pulpal considerations for operative dentistry,
JProsthet Dent 14(4):752, 1964.
25. Gilmore HW: Restorative materials and tooth preparation
design, Dent Clin North Am 15(1):99, 1971.
26. Goel VK et al: Effect of cavity depth on stresses in a restored
tooth, J Prosthet Dent 67(2):174, 1992.
27. Goho C, Aaron GR: Enhancement of anti-microbial properties of cavity varnish: a preliminary report, J Prosthet Dent
68(4):623, 1992.
28. Gorucu J, Tiritoglu M, Ozgiinaltay G: Effects of preparation
designs and adhesive systems on retention of class II amalgam restorations, JProsthet Dent 78(3):250, 1997.
29. Gottlieb EW, Retief DH, Bradley EL: Microleakage of conventional and high-copper amalgam restorations, J Prosthet Dent
53(3):355, 1985.
30. Gwinnett AJ et al: Adhesive restorations with amalgam:
guidelines for the clinician, Quintessence Int 25(10):687, 1994.
31. Hebling J, Giro EMA, Costa CAS: Human pulp response after an adhesive system application in deep cavities, J Dent
27(8):557,1999.
32. Hilton TJ: Cavity sealers, liners, and bases: current philosophies and indications for use, Oper Dent 21(4):134, 1996.
33. Hilton TJ: Can modern restorative procedures and materials
reliably seal cavities? In vitro investigations, Trans Acad Dent
Mater 12:21, 1998.
34. Jokstad A, Mjor IA: The quality of routine class II cavity
preparations for amalgam, Acta Odontol Scand 47(1):53, 1989.
35. Joynt RB et al: Fracture resistance of posterior teeth with glass
ionomer-composite resin systems, J Prosthet Dent 62(1):28,
1989.
36. Kanai S: Structure studies of amalgam II. Effect of burnishing
on the margins of occlusal amalgam fillings, Acta Odontol
Scand 24(1):47, 1966.
37. Khera SC, Chan KC: Microleakage and enamel finish, J Prosthet Dent 39(4):414, 1978.
38. Korale ME, Meiers JC: Microleakage of dentin bonding systems used with spherical and admixed amalgams, Am J Dent
9(6):249, 1996.
39. Kreulen CM et al: Replacement risk of amalgam treatment
modalities: 15-year results, J Dent 26(8):627, 1998.
40. Lagouvardos P, Sourai P, Douvitsas G: Coronal fractures in
posterior teeth, Oper Dent 14(1):28, 1989.
41. Larson TD, Douglas WH, Geisfeld RE: Effect of prepared cavities on the strength of teeth, Oper Dent 6(1):2, 1981.
42. Leon AR: The periodontum and restorative procedures, a critical review, J Oral Rehabil 4(2):105, 1977.
43. Letzel H et al: The influence of the amalgam alloy on the survival of amalgam restorations: a secondary analysis of multiple controlled clinical trials, J Dent Res 76(11):1787, 1997.
44. Lindemuth JS, Hagge MS, Broome JS: Effect of restoration
size on fracture resistance of bonded amalgam restorations,
Oper Dent 25(3):177, 2000.
45. Loe H: Reactions of marginal periodontal tissues to restorative procedures, Int Dent J 18(4):759, 1968.
46. Lovadino JR, Ruhnke LA, Consani S: Influence of burnishing
on amalgam adaptation to cavity walls, J Prosthet Dent
58(3):284, 1987.
47. Mahler DB: The amalgam-tooth interface, Oper Dent 21(6):230,
1996.
48. Mahler DB, Engle JH: Clinical evaluation of amalgam bonding
in class I and 11 restorations, J Am Dent Assoc 131(1):43, 2000.

49. Mahler DB, Nelson LW: Sensitivity answers sought in amalgam alloy microleakage study, J Am Dent Assoc 125(3):282,
1994.
50. Mahler DB, Terkla LG: Analysis of stress in dental structures,
Dent Clin North Am 2(11):789, 1958.
51. Markley MR: Restorations of silver amalgam, JAm Dent Assoc
43(2):133, 1951.
52. Maryniuk GA: In search of treatment longevity-a 30-year
perspective, J Am Dent Assoc 109(5):739, 1984.
53. Maryniuk GA, Kaplan SH: Longevity of restorations: survey
results of dentists' estimates and attitudes, J Am Dent Assoc
112(l):39,1986.
54. May KN, Wilder AD, Leinfelder KF: Clinical evaluation of various burnishing techniques on high-copper amalgam, J Prosthet Dent 61:213, 1982 (abstract).
55. May KN, Wilder AD, Leinfelder KF: Burnished amalgam
restorations: a two-year evaluation, J Prosthet Dent 49(2):193,
1983.
56. Mayhew RB, Schmeltzer LD, Pierson WP: Effect of polishing
on the marginal integrity of high-copper amalgams, Oper
Dent 11(l):8,1986.
57. Mjor IA, Jokstad A, Qvist V: Longevity of posterior restorations, Int Dent J 40(1):11, 1990.
58. Moffa JP: The longevity and reasons for replacement of amalgam alloys, J Dent Res 68:188, 1989 (abstract).
59. Mondelli J et al: Influence of proximal retention on the fracture strength of Class II amalgam restorations, J Prosthet Dent
46(4):420, 1981.
60. Mondelli J et al: Fracture strength of amalgam restorations in
modern Class II preparations with proximal retentive
grooves, J Prosthet Dent 32(5):564, 1974.
61. Mondelli RF et al: Fracture strength of weakened human premolars restored with amalgam with and without cusp coverage, Am J Dent 11(4):181, 1998.
62. Moore DL: Retentive grooves for the Class 2 amalgam
restoration: necessity or hazard? Oper Dent 17(1):29, 1992.
63. Neme AL, Evans DB, Maxson BB: Evaluation of dental adhesive systems with amalgam and resin composite restorations:
comparison of microleakage and bond strengths results, Oper
Dent 25(5):512, 2000.
64. Oliveira JP, Cochran MA, Moore BK: Influence of bonded
amalgam restorations on the fracture strength of teeth, Oper
Dent 21(3):110, 1996.
65. Osborne JW, Gale EN: Failure at the margin of amalgams as
affected by cavity width, tooth position, and alloy selection, J
Dent Res 60(3):682, 1981.
66. Osborne JW, Gale EN: Relationship of restoration width,
tooth position and alloy to fracture at the margins of 13- to
14-year-old amalgams, J Dent Res 69(9):1599, 1990.
67. Osborne JW, Norman RD: 13-year clinical assessment of
10 amalgam alloys, Dent Mater 6(3):189, 1990.
68. Osborne JW et al: Two independent evaluations of ten amalgam alloys, J Prosthet Dent 43(6):622, 1980.
69. Osborne JW, Summitt JB: Extension for prevention: is it relevant today? Am J Dent 11(4):189, 1998.
70. Osborne Jw, Norman RD, Gale EN: A 14-year clinical assessment of 12 amalgam alloys, Quintessence Int 22(11):857, 1991.
71. Pack AR: The amalgam overhang dilemma: a review of causes
and effects, prevention, and removal, N Z Dent J 85(380):55,
1989.
72. Restoration of tooth preparations with amalgam and tooth-colored
materials: project ACCORDS student syllabus, Washington, DC,
1974, US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.

C H A PT E R

17

73. Robbins JW: The placement of bases beneath amalgam
restorations: review of literature and recommendations for
use, J Am Dent Assoc 113(6):910, 1986.
74. Rodda JC: Modern class 11 amalgam tooth preparations, N Z
Dent j 68(312):132, 1972.
75. Schupbach P, Lutz F, Finger WJ: Closing of dentinal tubules
by Gluma desensitizer, Euro j Oral Sci 105 (5):414, 1997.
76. Setcos JC, Staninec M, Wilson NHF: Bonding of amalgam
restorations: existing knowledge and future prospects, Oper
Dent 25(2):121, 2000.
77. Smales RJ: Longevity of low- and high-copper amalgams analyzed by preparation class, tooth site, patient age, and operator, Oper Dent 16(5):162,1991.
78. Smales RJ: Longevity of cusp-covered amalgams: survival after 15 years, Oper Dent 16(1):17, 1991.
79. Smales RJ, Wetherell JD: Review of bonded amalgam restorations and assessment in a general practice over five years,
Oper Dent 25(5):374, 2000.
80. Sockwell CL: Dental handpieces and rotary cutting instruments, Dent Clin North Am 15(1):219, 1971.
81. Staninec M: Retention of amalgam restorations: undercuts
versus bonding, Quintessence Int 20(5):347, 1989.
82. Straffon LH, Dennison JB, Asgar K: A clinical evaluation of
polished and unpolished amalgams: 36-month results, Pediatr Dent 6(4):220, 1984.
83. Sturdevant JR et al: Conservative preparation designs for
Class 11 amalgam restorations, Dent Mater 3(3):144, 1987.

Classes I, II, and VI Amalgam Restorations

84. Summitt JB et al: Effect of grooves on resistance form of conservative class 2 amalgams, Oper Dent 17(2):50, 1992.
85. Summitt JB, Osborne JW: Initial preparations for amalgam
restorations: extending the longevity of the tooth-restoration
unit, j Am Dent Assoc 123(11):67, 1992.
86. Summitt JB, Osborne JW, Burgess JO: Effect of grooves on resistance/retention form of Class 2 approximal slot amalgam
restorations, Oper Dent 18(5):209, 1993.
87. Summitt JB et al: Effect of grooves on resistance form of Class
2 amalgams with wide occlusal preparations, Oper Dent
18(2):42, 1993.
88. Sweeney JT: Amalgam manipulation: manual vs. mechanical
aids. 11. Comparison of clinical applications, J Am Dent Assoc
27(12):1940, 1940.
89. Tangsgoolwatana J et al: Microleakage evaluation of bonded
amalgam restorations: confocal microscopy versus radioisotope, Quintessence Int 28(7):467, 1997.
90. Vale WA: Tooth preparation and further thoughts on high
speed, Br Dent j 107(11):333, 1959.
91. Vlietstra JR, Sidaway DA, Plant CG: Cavity cleansers, Br Dent
j 149(10):293, 1980.
92. Waerhaug J: Histologic considerations which govern where
the margins of restorations should be located in relation to
the gingivae, Dent Clin North Am 4(3):161, 1960.

I.

II.

Classes III and V amalgam restorations, 743
A. Pertinent material qualities and properties, 743
B. Indications, 743
1. Class III, 743
2. Class V 744
C. Contraindications, 744
D. Advantages, 745
E. Disadvantages, 745
Clinical technique for Class III amalgam restorations, 745
A. Initial procedures, 745
B. Tooth preparation, 745
1. Preparation for the distal surface of the
maxillary canine, 745
2. Preparation for the mandibular incisor, 751
C. Restorative technique, 752
1. Sealer or bonding application, 752
2. Matrix placement, 753
3. Condensation and carving, 753
4. Finishing and polishing, 753

III.

Clinical technique for Class V amalgam restorations, 754
A. Initial procedures, 754
B. Tooth preparation, 755
1. Initial tooth preparation, 755
2. Final tooth preparation, 756
3. Large preparations that include line
angles, 758
C. Restorative technique, 758
1. Sealer or bonding application, 758
2. Matrix placement, 759
3. Condensation and carving, 760
4. Finishing and polishing, 761

CHAPTER

18

CLASSES III AND V AMALGAM
RESTORATIONS
This chapter presents information about Class III and
Class V amalgam restorations. Class III restorations are
indicated for defects located on the proximal surface of
anterior teeth that do not affect the incisal edge. Part of
the facial or the lingual surfaces may also be involved in
Class III restorations. Class V restorations are indicated
to restore defects on the facial or lingual cervical one
third of any tooth.
The Class III amalgam restoration is used infrequently; its use has been supplanted by tooth-colored
restorations (primarily composite) that have become increasingly wear resistant and color stable. However, because there are indications for Class III amalgam
restorations, practitioners should be familiar with this
restorative technique.
The Class V amalgam restoration can be especially
technically sensitive because of location, extent of
caries, and limited access and visibility. Cervical caries
usually develops because the affected tooth surface is
unclean and the patient has a caries-inducing diet. Patients with gingival recession have a predisposition to
cervical caries, because dentin is more susceptible to
demineralization than enamel. Patients with a reduced
salivary flow caused by certain medical conditions (e.g.,
Sjogren's syndrome), medications, or head and neck radiation therapy also have a predisposition for cervical
caries. These patients usually have less saliva to buffer
the acids produced by oral bacteria. Cervical caries and
root caries are terms often used interchangeably. However, the term cervical caries may be more accurate be-

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

cause Class V restorations, by definition, include the
gingival one third (i.e., cervical area) of the facial and
lingual surface of the tooth crown. However, root caries
is also an accurate description of lesions that exist on the
root surface of the tooth, although these may include the
proximal surfaces as well.
Incipient, smooth-surface enamel caries appears as a
chalky white line just occlusal or incisal to the crest of
the marginal gingiva (usually on the facial surface) (Fig.
18-1). These areas are often overlooked in the oral examination unless the teeth are free of debris, isolated
with cotton rolls, and dried gently with the air syringe.
When incipient cervical caries has not decalcified the
enamel sufficiently to result in cavitation (i.e., a break in
the continuity of the surface), the lesion may be remineralized by appropriate techniques, including patient
motivation for proper diet and hygiene. Occasionally,
an enamel surface that is only slightly cavitated may be
treated successfully by smoothing with sandpaper
discs, polishing, and treating with a fluoride preparation or a dentin adhesive in an attempt to prevent further caries that may require a restoration. Obviously,
this prophylactic, preventive treatment cannot be instituted if caries has progressed to decalcify and soften the
enamel to an appreciable depth. In this instance, a Class
V tooth preparation and restoration is indicated, particularly if caries has penetrated to the dentinoenamel
j unction (DEJ) (Fig. 18-2, A). When a large number of
cervical lesions are present (see Fig. 18-2, B), a relatively
high caries index is obvious. In addition to the restorative treatment, the patient should be instructed and encouraged to implement an aggressive prevention program to avoid recurrent decay.

PERTINENT MATERIAL QUALITIES
AND PROPERTIES
Material qualities and properties important for Classes
III and V amalgam restorations are strength, longevity,
ease of use, and past success. (See Chapter 16 for a discussion of the pertinent material qualities and properties for amalgam.)

I NDICATIONS
FIG 18-1 Incipient carious lesions of enamel appear as white
spots. The affected surface may be smooth (i.e., noncavitated). Carious white spots are more visible when dried.

Class III. There are few indications for a Class III
amalgam restoration. It is generally reserved for the
distal surface of maxillary and mandibular canines if:

FIG 18-2 Cervical caries. A, Cavitation involving both enamel and dentin. B, Relatively high caries index is obvious when
l arge number of cervical lesions is present.

B

CHAPTER

18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

18-3 A, 6-year-old cervical amalgam restoration. B, After 16 years some abrasion and erosion is evident at gingival margin of lateral incisor and canine restorations. C, 20-year-old cervical amalgam restorations.
FIG

18-4 Surgical access. A, Class V preparation requiring flap procedure with relaxing incision (arrow). B, Completed restoration with suture in place. C, 1-week postoperative with suture
removed.
FIG

(1) the preparation is extensive with only minimal fa-

cial involvement, (2) the gingival margin involves primarily cementum, or (3) moisture control is difficult.
For esthetic reasons, amalgam is rarely indicated for the
proximal surfaces of incisors and the mesial surface of
canines.
However, amalgam may be used for any Class III
restoration that does not involve the facial surface or
undermine the incisal corner. Access for the tooth
preparation is generally from the lingual approach to
conserve the enamel facial to the proximal contact.
When the incisal corner is involved, a Class IV tooth
preparation is necessary, and a composite is usually indicated for esthetics and retention.
Class V. Class V amalgam restorations may be used
anywhere in the mouth. As with Class III amalgam
restorations, they are generally reserved for nonesthetic
areas, for areas where access and visibility are limited
and where moisture control is difficult, and for areas
that are significantly deep gingivally.
Because of limited access and visibility, many Class V
restorations are difficult and present special problems
during both the preparation and restorative procedures.
Amalgam, composite, resin-modified glass ionomer, or
compomer are most often used to treat cervical caries.
One measure of clinical success of cervical amalgam
restorations is the length of time the restoration serves
without failing (Fig. 18-3; see also Fig. 9-20, B). Many

properly placed Class V amalgams will be clinically acceptable for many years. However, some cervical amalgam restorations show evidence of failure even after a
short period. Inattention to tooth preparation principles, improper manipulation of the material, and moisture contamination contribute to early failure. Extended
service depends on the operator's care in following accepted treatment techniques, as well as proper care by
the patient.
Amalgam may be preferred over esthetic restorative
materials on partial denture abutment teeth, because
amalgam is more resistant to wear as clasps move over
the restoration. Furthermore, contours prepared in the
restoration to provide rests and retentive areas for the
clasp tips may be achieved more easily and maintained
longer when an amalgam restoration is used.
Occasionally, amalgam is preferred when the carious
lesion extends gingivally enough that a soft-tissue flap
must be reflected for adequate access and visibility (Fig.
18-4). Proper surgical procedures must be followed, including sterile technique, careful soft-tissue management, and complete debridement of the operating site
before wound closure.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
Classes III and V amalgam restorations are usually contraindicated in esthetically important areas because
many patients object to metal restorations that are visi-

C H A P T E R 18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

FIG 18-5 Patients may object to metal restorations that are
visible during conversation.
ble during conversation (Fig. 18-5). Generally, Class V
amalgams placed on the facial surface of mandibular canines, premolars, and molars are not readily visible.
However, those placed on maxillary premolars and first
molars may be visible. Thus the patient's esthetic demands should be considered when planning treatment.

ADVANTAGES
Amalgam restorations are stronger than other Class III
and V direct restorations. In addition, they are generally
easier to place and may be less expensive to the patient.
Because of its metallic color, amalgam is easily distinguished from the surrounding tooth structure. Therefore amalgam restorations are usually easier to finish
and polish without damage to the adjacent surfaces.

DISADVANTAGES
The primary disadvantage of Class III and Class V
amalgam restorations is that they are metallic and anesthetic. In addition, the preparation for an amalgam
restoration typically requires 90-degree cavosurface
margins, specific and uniform axial depths, and incorporation of secondary retentive features, all of which results in a less conservative preparation than that for
most esthetic restorative materials. The potential for
mercury contamination is another disadvantage.

CLINICAL TECHNIQUE FOR CLASS
III AMALGAM RESTORATIONS
I NITIAL PROCEDURES
After appropriate review of the patient's chart (including medical history), treatment plan, and radiographs,
the gingival extension of the preparation should be anticipated. Anesthesia is frequently necessary when a vital tooth is to be restored. Additionally, prewedging in
the gingival embrasure of the proximal site to be restored provides better (1) protection of the soft tissue
and rubber dam, (2) access because of slight separation
of teeth, and (3) reestablishment of the proximal contact.
The use of a rubber dam is generally recommended (see
Chapter 10); however, cotton roll isolation is acceptable
if moisture can be adequately controlled.

FIG

18-6 Restoration for Class III tooth preparation using facial approach on mandibular canine. Restoration is 5 years
old. (Courtesy of Dr. C.L. Sockwell.)

TOOTH PREPARATION
Preparation for the Distal Surface of the Maxillary
Canine. A lingual access preparation of the distal sur-

face of the maxillary canine is recommended because
the use of amalgam in that location is more likely. However, a facial approach for a mandibular canine may be
indicated if the lesion is more facial than lingual. The
mandibular restoration is often not visible at conversational distance (Fig. 18-6).
The outline form of the Class III amalgam preparation on a canine is similar to the conventional Class III
composite preparation (see Chapter 12). However,
there are differences. The amalgam preparation uses a
bur instead of a diamond and incorporates no enamel
bevels. In addition, it requires secondary retention features and a specific and uniform axial depth. Usually
the outline form includes only the proximal surface;
however, a lingual dovetail may be indicated if one existed previously or if additional retention is needed for
a larger restoration.
Initial Tooth Preparation. Bur size selection depends
on the anticipated size of the restoration. Usually a No.
2 bur is used for the entry cut on the distolingual marginal ridge. However, a No. 1/2 or No. 1 bur should be
used when the tooth or carious lesion is small. The bur
is positioned so that the entry cut will penetrate into the
carious lesion, which is usually gingival to (and slightly
into) the contact area. Ideally the bur is positioned so
that its long axis is perpendicular to the lingual surface
of the tooth but directed at a mesial angle as close to the
adjacent tooth as possible. (The bur position may be described as perpendicular to the distolingual line angle of
the tooth.) This conserves the marginal ridge enamel
(Fig. 18-7, A through C). Penetration through the enamel
positions the bur so that additional cutting will both isolate the proximal enamel affected by caries and remove
some or all of the infected dentin. In addition, penetration should be at a limited initial axial depth (i.e., 0.5 to

CHAPTER 18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 18-7 Entry for Class III tooth preparation on maxillary canine. A, Bur position is perpendicular to enamel surface at point of entry. B, Initial penetration through enamel is directed toward cavitated, carious lesion. C, Initial entry should isolate proximal enamel, while preserving
as much of the marginal ridge as possible. D, Initial cutting reveals DEJ (arrow).

Axial wall
dentinal depths
before preparing
cove and groove:
crown, 0.5-0.6 mm
root, 0.75-0.8 mm

FIG . 18-8 Mesiodistal vertical section showing l ocation,
depth direction (arrows), and direction depth of retention form
i n Class III tooth preparations of different gingival depths. i, Incisal cove; g1, gingival groove, enamel margin; g2, gingival
groove, root surface margin. Distance from outer aspect of g2
groove to margin is approximately 0.3 mm; bur head diameter is 0.5 mm; direction depth of groove is half this diameter
( or approximately 0.3 mm [0.25 mm]).

0.6 mm) inside the DEJ (see Fig. 18-7, C and D) or at a
0.75- to 0.8- mm axial depth when the gingival margin
will be on the root surface (in cementum) (Fig. 18-8).
This 0.75- mm axial depth on the root surface will allow
a 0.25 mm distance (the diameter of the No. 1/4 bur is 0.5
mm) between the retention groove (which will be
placed later) and the gingival cavosurface margin. Infected dentin that is deeper than this limited initial axial
depth is removed later during final tooth preparation.
For a small lesion, the facial margin is extended 0.2 to
0.3 mm into the facial embrasure (if necessary), with a
curved outline from the incisal to the gingival margin
(resulting in a less visible margin). The lingual outline
blends with the incisal and gingival margins in a
smooth curve, creating a preparation with little or no
lingual wall. The cavosurface angle should be 90 degrees at all margins. The facial, incisal, and gingival

FIG 18-9 Class III tooth preparation on maxillary canine. A,
Round bur shaping incisal area. Note that incisal angle remains. B, Initial shape of preparation accomplished with
round bur.

walls should meet the axial wall at approximately right
angles (although the lingual wall meets the axial wall at
an obtuse angle or may be continuous with the axial
wall) (Fig. 18-9). If a large, round bur is used, the internal angles will be more rounded. The axial wall should
be uniformly deep into dentin and follow the faciolingual contour of the external tooth surface (Fig. 18-10).
The initial axial wall depth may be in sound dentin (i.e.,
shallow lesion), in infected dentin (i.e., moderate to
deep lesion), or in existing restorative material, if replacing a restoration.
Incisal extension to remove carious tooth structure
may eliminate the proximal contact (Fig. 18-11). However, it is important to conserve as much tooth structure
as possible at the distoincisal corner (i.e., canopy) to reduce the potential for subsequent fracture. When possible, it is best to leave the incisal margin in contact with
the adjacent tooth.
When preparing a gingival wall that is near either the
level of the rubber dam or apical to it, it is beneficial to

CHAPTER

18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

FIG

18-10 Transverse section of mandibular lateral incisor illustrating that lingual wall
of Class III tooth preparation may meet axial wall at an obtuse angle and that axial wall
i s a uniform depth into dentin and follows faciolingual contour of external tooth surface.

FIG
18-11 Distofacial ( A) and i ncisal
( B) views of canine to show curved proximal outline necessary to preserve distoincisal corner of tooth. Incisal margin of this
preparation example is located slightly incisally of proximal contact (but whenever
possible, the margin may be in the contact
area).

FIG

18-12 Refining proximal portion. A through C, Small, round bur is used to shape preparation walls, define line angles, and initiate removal of any undermined enamel along gingival and
facial margins. D, Tooth preparation completed except for final finishing of enamel margins and
placing retention form.

have earlier placed a wedge in the gingival embrasure
to depress and protect the soft tissue and rubber dam.
As the bur is preparing the gingival wall, it may lightly
shave the wedge. A triangular (i.e., anatomic) wedge,
rather than a round wedge, is used for a deep gingival
margin.
Complete the initial tooth preparation by using a No.
'/z bur to accentuate the axial line angles (Fig. 18-12, A
and B), particularly the axiogingival angle. This facilitates the subsequent placement of retention grooves

and leaves the internal line angles slightly rounded.
Rounded internal preparation angles reduce stress concentration in the tooth, thereby reducing the potential of
restoration fracture. In addition, they permit more complete condensation of the amalgam. The No. 1/Z bur may
also be used to smooth any roughened, undermined
enamel produced at the gingival and facial cavosurface
margins (see Fig. 18-12, C. The incisal margin of the
minimally extended preparation is often not accessible
to the larger round bur without marring the adjacent

C H A P T E R 18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

FIG .18-13 Preparing gingival retention
form. A, Position of No. '/, bur in axiofaciogingival point angle. B, Advancing bur
l i ngually to prepare groove along axi ogingival line angle. (See Fig. 18-8 regarding location, depth direction, and direction depth of groove.) C, Completed
gingival retention groove.

FIG . 18-14 Preparing incisal retention cove. A, Position of No. '/,
bur in axioincisal point angle. B, Completed incisal cove.

tooth (see Fig. 18-12, D). Further finishing of the incisal
margin is presented later. At this point, the initial tooth
preparation is completed.
Final Tooth Preparation. Final tooth preparation
may involve removing any remaining infected dentin,
protecting the pulp, developing secondary resistance
and retention forms, finishing external walls, and the final procedures of cleaning, inspecting, and desensitizing or bonding. Remove any remaining infected carious
dentin on the axial wall using a slowly revolving round
bur (No. 2 or 4) or appropriate spoon excavators or
both. (Refer to Chapters 6 and 11 for the indications and
technique for placing a liner.)
For the Class III amalgam restoration, resistance form
against postrestorative fracture is provided by: (1) cavosurface and amalgam margins of 90 degrees, (2) enamel
walls supported by sound dentin, (3) sufficient bulk of
amalgam (minimal 1-mm thickness), and (4) no sharp
preparation internal angles. The boxlike preparation
form provides primary retention form. Secondary retention form is provided by a gingival groove, an incisal
cove, and, sometimes, a lingual dovetail.
Prepare the gingival retention groove by placing a
No. 1/4 bur (rotating at low speed) in the axiofaciogingival point angle. It is positioned in the dentin to maintain
0.2 mm of dentin between the groove and the DEJ.
Move the bur lingually along the axiogingival line angle, with the angle of cutting generally bisecting the angle between the gingival and axial walls. Ideally, the di-

rection of the gingival groove is slightly more gingival
than axial (and the direction of an incisal [i.e., occlusal]
groove would be slightly more incisal [i.e., occlusal]
than axial) (Fig. 18-13; see also Fig. 18-8).
Alternatively, if less retention form is needed, two
gingival coves may be used, as opposed to a continuous
groove. One each may be placed in the axiogingivofacial
and axiogingivolingual point angles. The diameter of
the bur is 0.5 mm, and the depth of the groove should
be half this diameter, or 0.25 mm. (See the location and
depthwise direction of the groove, where the gingival
wall is partially of enamel, in Fig. 8-18.) If the axiogingival line angle is ideally located, directing the groove
depthwise (as described) should not undermine the
enamel. When preparing a retention groove on the root
surface, the angle of cutting is more gingival, resulting
in the distance from the gingival cavosurface margin to
the groove being approximately 0.3 mm (see Fig. 18-8).
Careful technique is necessary in preparing the gingival
retention groove. If the dentin that supports the gingival
enamel is removed, the enamel is subject to fracture. In
addition, if the groove is placed only in the axial wall,
no effective retention form is developed and there is risk
of pulpal involvement.
Prepare an incisal retention cove at the axiofacioincisal point angle with a No. 1/, bur in dentin, being careful not to undermine the enamel. It is directed similarly
into the incisal point angle and prepared to one half the
diameter of the bur (Fig. 18-14). Undermining the incisal

CHAPTER

18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

FIG 18-15 Use of palm-and-thumb grasp
to place incisal retention cove. A, Hand position showing thumb rest. B, Handpiece
position for preparing incisal retention.

FIG

18-16 Completed Class III tooth preparation for amalgam restoration.

FIG 18-17 Extensive Class III tooth
preparation. A, Initial tooth preparation
with No. 2 bur. B, Defining line
angles and removing undermined
enamel with No. '/Z bur. C, Placing retention groove using No. '/, bur. Note
completed incisal cove.

enamel (or incisal canopy) should be avoided. For the
maxillary canine, the palm-and-thumb grasp may be
used to direct the bur incisally (Fig. 18-15). This coinpletes the typical Class III amalgam tooth preparation
(Fig. 18-16). (If the use of a bonding system is necessary,
refer to Chapter 17 for a discussion of the technique.) As
with Classes I and II amalgams, it is recommended that
the clinician prepare mechanical retention (even if using
an adhesive system).
A lingual dovetail is not required in small or moderately sized Class III amalgam restorations. It may be
used in large preparations, especially those with excessive incisal extension in which additional retention form
is needed. However, the dovetail may not be necessary

(even in large preparations) if incisal secondary retention form can be judiciously and effectively accomplished (Fig. 18-17).
If a lingual dovetail is needed, prepare it only after initial preparation of the proximal portion has been completed. Otherwise the tooth structure needed for the isthmus between the proximal portion and the dovetail may
be removed when the proximal outline form is prepared.
The lingual dovetail should be conservative, generally not
extending beyond the mesiodistal midpoint of the lingual
surface. This will vary according to the extent of the proximal caries. The axial depth of the dovetail should approximate 1 mm, and the axial wall should be parallel to
the lingual surface of the tooth. This wall may or may not

CHAPTER

18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

FIG
18-18 Lingual dovetail providing additional retention for extensive amalgam restoration.
A, Bur position at correct depth and angulation to begin cutting. B, Initial cut in beginning dovetail. C, Bur moved to most mesial extent of dovetail. D, If possible, cutting should not extend beyond midlingual position. E, Bur cutting gingival extension of dovetail. F, Incisal and gingival extensions of dovetail. G, Completing isthmus. Note that proximal and lingual portions are
connected by incisal and gingival walls in smooth curves. H, Completed lingual dovetail.

be in dentin. Position the No. 245 bur in the proximal portion at the correct depth and angulation, and move the
bur in a mesial direction (Fig. 18-18, A and B). The correct
angulation places the long axis of the bur perpendicular to
the lingual surface. Move the bur to the point that corresponds to the most mesial extent of the dovetail (see Fig.
18-18, C and D). Next, move the bur incisally and gingivally to create sufficient incisogingival dimension to the
dovetail (approximately 2.5 mm) (see Fig. 18-18, E and F).
Then, prepare the incisal and gingival walls of the isthmus
in smooth curves connecting the dovetail to the proximal
outline form (see Fig. 18-18, G and H).
The gingival margin trimmer may be used to bevel
(or round) the axiopulpal line angle (i.e., the junction of
the proximal and dovetail preparation). This increases
the strength of the restoration at the junction of the
proximal and lingual portions by providing bulk and reducing stress concentration. The lingual convergence of
the dovetail's external walls (prepared with the No. 245
bur) usually provides sufficient retention form. However, retention coves, one in the incisal corner and one
in the gingival corner (Fig. 18-19), may be placed in
the dovetail to enhance retention if the axial wall of the

18-19 Ensuring retention in lingual dovetail (often optional). A, Position of No. 33 1/2 bur for cutting retention cove.
B, Note that preparation of cove should not remove dentinal
support of lingual enamel (arrow).
FIG .

dovetail is in dentin. The coves are prepared with the
No. 33'/Z bur in dentin that does not immediately support the lingual enamel. This may require deepening of
the axial wall.
Remove any unsupported enamel, smooth enamel
walls and margins, and refine the cavosurface angles

CHAPTER 18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

FIG 18-20 Class III tooth preparation for amalgam restoration on mandibular incisor. A, Enteri ng tooth from lingual approach. B, Finishing facial, incisal, and gingival enamel margins with
an 8-3-22 triple angle hoe. Note how the reverse bevel blade is used on the gingival enamel.
C, Placing incisal and gingival retention forms with No.'/, bur. D, Dotted line indicates outline of
additional extension sometimes necessary for access in placing incisal retention cove. E, Position of bibeveled hatchet 3-2-28 to place incisal retention cove. F, Axial wall forms convex surface over pulp. G, Completed tooth preparation. Note gingival retention groove.

FIG 18-21 Completed distolingual Class III tooth preparation
for amalgam.

where indicated. The 8-3-22 hoe is recommended for
finishing minimally extended margins (Fig. 18-20). If the
gingival margin is in enamel, a slight bevel (approximately 20 degrees) is necessary to ensure full-length
enamel rods forming the cavosurface margin. All the

walls of the preparation should meet the external tooth
surface to form a right angle (i.e., butt joint) (Fig. 18-21;
see also Fig. 18-16). Various steps in a clinical procedure
with the dovetail are shown in Fig. 18-22.
The completed tooth preparation should be carefully
inspected and cleaned before restoration. Careful assessment should be made that all caries has been removed, depths are proper, margins provide for the correct amalgam and tooth preparation angles, and the
tooth is cleaned of any residual debris. Desensitizers or
bonding agents are used as part of the final preparation
and restorative stages. (Refer to Chapters 16 and 17 for
a discussion of bonded amalgam restorations.)
Preparation for the Mandibular Incisor. The use of
a Class III amalgam restoration for a mandibular incisor is rare. If used, the preparation is similar to that
for maxillary canines. Obviously for esthetic reasons,
amalgam is best suited for the carious lesion that can be
placed from lingual access rather than for the tooth

C H A P T E R 18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

FIG 18-22 Distolingual tooth preparation and restoration. A, Bur position for entry. B, Penetration made through lingual enamel to caries. C, Proximal portion completed except for retention
form. D, Preparing dovetail. E, Completed preparation except for retention groove and coves. F,
Bur position for incisal cove in dovetail. G, Compound matrix ready for insertion of amalgam.
H, Carving completed and rubber dam removed. I, Polished restoration.

preparation that extends onto the facial surface. However, as with the distal surfaces of canines, amalgam
can be used for mandibular incisors if: (1) access and
visibility are limited, (2) the gingival margin in primarily in cementum, and (3) moisture control is difficult.
Preliminary procedures for operating (e.g., anesthesia,
isolation of the operating site, wedging) are the same as
presented previously.
To prepare the outline form, enter the tooth from the
lingual, when possible, or facial, when necessary The

choice of lingual or facial approach depends on the position of the tooth, the location of the carious lesion, and
esthetics. (The initial and final tooth preparation technique is the same as described previously for the distal
surface of a maxillary canine.)
RESTORATIVE TECHNIQUE
Sealer or Bonding Application. Adhesives are used
occasionally for larger amalgam restorations where
bonding may increase the resistance and retention

C H A P T E R 18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 18-23 Matrix strip design. A, Design required for compound-supported
matrix for Class II tooth preparations.
B, Alteration necessary for Class III
preparation on maxillary canine. C, Alteration necessary for mandibular incisor. Note that strip material is cut to
approximate slope of lingual surface.
forms (see Chapter 17 for adhesive application protocol). Smales and Wetherell were unable to demonstrate
a significant difference between bonded and varnished
amalgam restorations over five years . 5 However, Setcos
et al concluded that bonded amalgam restorations may
provide distinct advantages over nonbonded amalgam
restorations, including decreased postoperative sensitivity, improved marginal adaptation, and a lower incidence of secondary caries.'
The use of a dentin desensitizer over the prepared
tooth structure before placing a nonbonded amalgam is
generally recommended as a sealer. Dentin desensitizer
is rubbed onto the prepared tooth surface for 30 seconds
and dried; then the amalgam is condensed into place.
When using desensitizing agents, the etching and adhesive steps of typical adhesive systems are omitted. Berry
et al reported that the primer component (i.e., dentin desensitizer) of several dentin bonding systems significantly reduced interfacial leakage of Class I amalgam
restorations over 3 months compared with unlined and
varnished groups .
Matrix Placement. The wedged, compound-supported matrix may be used for the Class III amalgam
restoration. Insertion of the amalgam into the Class III
tooth preparation is usually from the lingual. Thus it is
essential to trim the lingual portion of the strip matrix
material correctly to avoid covering the preparation and
blocking access for insertion of the amalgam. Using 5/16
inch (8 mm) wide, 0.002 inch (0.05 mm) thick, (ribbon)
stainless steel matrix material, cut a length that will
cover one third of the facial surface and extend through
the proximal to the lingual surface. Trim the lingual portion by cutting the strip at an angle that corresponds approximately to the slope of the lingual surface of the
tooth (Fig. 18-23). Next, use fingers to contour the strip
to approximate the circumferential contour of the tooth.
Then, lay the strip on a resilient paper pad and burnish
it using an egg-shaped burnisher, imparting the desired
contact and contour form. Place the strip in position,
and insert the wedge from the facial or lingual embrasure, whichever is greater. Now, stabilize the facial portion of the strip with low-fusing compound. A smaller
amount of compound may be used lingually to position
and stabilize the matrix material against the linguogingival corner (see Fig. 18-22, G). The experienced operator may coat the tip of the wedge with softened compound before the wedge is inserted and position the
wedge and compound simultaneously. Precontoured

FIG . 18-24 Inconspicuous facial margin (arrow) of Class III
amalgam restoration on maxillary canine.

FIG 18-25 Class III amalgam restoration on mandibular incisor (arrow).
metallic matrices may be used (instead of custom-made
matrices) if the contour of the precontoured matrix coincides with that of the proximal surface being restored.
If the preparation is small and the matrix is sufficiently
rigid, compound may not be used.
Condensation and Carving. Insertion of the amalgam, initial carving, matrix removal, wedge removal,
and final carving are similar to the techniques for posterior teeth (see Chapter 17). (If a dentin bonding system
is to be used, refer to the section regarding bonded
amalgam restorations in Chapter 17.) If necessary, the
inserted restoration can be polished after a 24-hour delay. When properly placed, conservative restorations in
incisors and canines are relatively inconspicuous (Fig.
18-24). Fig. 18-25 illustrates a Class III amalgam restoration in a mandibular incisor.
Finishing and Polishing. The finishing and polishing
techniques and procedures are the same as presented in
Chapters 16 and 17.

CHAPTER

18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

CLINICAL TECHNIQUE FOR CLASS
V AMALGAM RESTORATIONS
I NITIAL PROCEDURES
Proper isolation prevents moisture contamination of the
operating site, enhances asepsis, and facilitates access
and visibility. Moisture in the form of saliva, gingival
sulcular fluid, or gingival hemorrhage must be excluded
during caries removal, liner and adhesive application, if
indicated, and insertion and carving of amalgam. Moisture impairs visual assessment, may contaminate the
pulp during caries removal (especially with a pulpal exposure), and negatively affects the physical properties of
restorative materials. The gingival margin of Class V
tooth preparations is often apical to the gingival crest.
Such a gingival margin necessitates retraction of the free
gingiva with a retraction cord or appropriate rubber
dam and retainer to protect it and to provide access,
while also eliminating seepage of sulcular fluid into the
tooth preparation or restorative materials.
These isolation objectives are met by local anesthesia
and isolation by: (1) cotton roll (or rolls) and retraction

FIG . 18-26

The rubber dam and No. 212 retainer may be required to properly isolate carious area.

FIG

18-27 Use of retraction cord for
i solation of Class V lesion. A, Preoperative view. B, Cord placement initiated. C, Cord placement using a thin,
flat-bladed i nstrument. D, Cord
placement completed.

cord or (2) the rubber dam and suitable cervical retainer
(Fig. 18-26) (see Chapter 10). Isolation by cotton roll (or
rolls) and retraction cord is satisfactory when properly
accomplished. This type of isolation is practical and
probably the approach most often used.
The retraction cord should be placed in the sulcus before initial tooth preparation to reduce the possibility of
cutting instruments damaging the free gingiva. The
cord should produce a temporary, adequate, nontraumatic apical retraction and lateral deflection of the free
gingiva. The cord may be treated with epinephrine. Epinephrine on abraded gingiva can be rapidly absorbed
into the circulatory system, causing a rise in blood pressure, elevated heart rate, and possible dysrhythmia.
Gentle placement of cord and absence of trauma to the
free gingiva should preclude such systemic sequelae.
Careful operative dentistry should generally not
abrade the gingiva, even in tooth preparations extending subgingivally. Abrading the gingiva will open capillaries, which increases the absorption of epinephrine,
causes bleeding, and limits visibility. Cords without epinephrine are available for patients at risk for cardiac
problems.
Place the cotton roll (or rolls) and dry the area to be
operated with the air syringe. Retraction cord may be
braided, twisted, or woven. Cut retraction cord of suitable diameter to a length'/, inch (6 mm) longer than the
gingival margin. The diameter of the cord should be
easily accommodated in the gingival sulcus. Some operators prefer to place the cord in a Dappen dish, wet it
with a drop of styptic solution (e.g., Hemodent, Premier
Dental Products, King of Prussia, PA), and then blot it
with a 2 X 2 inch (5 X 5 cm) gauze to remove excess liquid. Next, the cord should be twisted tightly to remove

CHAPTER

18

excess liquid and reduce the cord diameter. Braided or
woven cord is usually easier to use because it will not
unravel during placement. A larger cord can be inserted
over the first cord, if the sulcus is large enough to accommodate two cords. Using a thin, blunt-edged instrument blade or the side of an explorer tine, gently insert the cord progressively to place. A slight backward
direction of the instrument as it steps along the cord will
help prevent dislodgment of previously inserted cord
(Fig. 18-27). In addition, using a second instrument stepping along behind the first instrument can help prevent
dislodgment of cord. Additionally, using the air syringe
or cotton pellets to reduce or absorb the sulcular fluid in
the cord already placed is helpful during the cord placement. The cord will result in adequate retraction in a
short time. If significant blanching of the free gingiva is
observed (or if too much pressure has to be applied to
apply the cord), an oversized cord has been selected and
should be exchanged with a cord of smaller diameter.
The cord usually remains in place throughout tooth
preparation and insertion and carving of amalgam. The
cord can be moistened before or after placement with a
styptic solution (e.g., Hemodent) if slight hemorrhage is
anticipated or observed. Alternatively, the cord can be
used dry.
As emphasized earlier, the size (i.e., diameter) of the
cord should be selected according to the depth of the
sulcus and the free gingiva characteristics. Usually insert the smallest diameter cord into the sulcus on the facial of anterior and premolar teeth because the free gingiva is thin, delicate, and tight. If necessary, a single
strand of unbraided cord can be separated and twisted
into a still smaller cord.
While carving amalgam at the gingival margin, the
presence of the cord may cause difficulty in feeling the
unprepared tooth surface gingival to the margin to prevent undercarving of the margin; this results in overcontour and marginal excess. In this instance, after carving gross excess the cord can be teased from place before
completing the carving.

TOOTH PREPARATION
Proper outline form for Class V amalgam tooth preparations results in extending the cavosurface margins to
sound tooth structure, while maintaining a limited axial
depth of 0.5 mm inside the DEJ and 0.75 mm inside the

18-28 Starting Class V tooth
preparation. A, Bur positioned for entry into carious lesion. B, Entry cut is
the beginning of outline form having
a limited axial depth. (The end of bur
i n center of lesion may be in carious
tooth structure or air.)
FIG

A

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

cementum (when on the root surface). The outline form
for the Class V amalgam tooth preparation is primarily
determined by the location and size of the caries or old
restorative material. Historically, cervical amalgam
restorations were made with preparation outlines that
were overextended. Presently, a more conservative philosophy is used (resulting in smaller restorations with
outline forms that are dictated primarily by the size of
the defect). Clinical judgment determines final preparation outline, especially when the cavosurface margins
approach or extend into areas of enamel decalcification.
The operator must observe the prepared enamel wall to
evaluate the depth of the decalcified enamel and to determine if cavitation exists peripheral to the wall. When
no cavitation has occurred and when the decalcification
does not extend appreciably into the enamel, extension
of the outline form often should cease. In some cases, if
all decalcification was included in the outline form, the
preparation would extend into the proximal cervical areas (if not circumferentially around the tooth). Such a
preparation would be difficult and perhaps unrestorable. A full-crown restoration should be considered for
teeth with extensive cervical decalcification.
I nitial Tooth Preparation. A Class V amalgam
restoration is not often used in a mandibular canine, but
it is presented here for illustration. The same general
principles for tooth preparation apply for all other tooth
locations. Using a tapered fissure bur of suitable size,
enter the carious lesion (or existing restoration) to a limited initial axial depth of 0.5 mm inside the DEJ (Fig.
18-28). This depth is usually 1 to 1.25 mm total axial
depth, depending on the incisogingival (i.e., occlusogingival) location. (The enamel is considerably thicker
occlusally and incisally than cervically) However, if the
preparation is on the root surface, the axial depth is approximately 0.75 mm. The end of the bur at the initial
depth is in dentin, in infected carious dentin, or in old
restorative material. Use the edge of the end of the bur
to penetrate the area; this is more efficient than using the
flat end of the bur, reducing the possibility of the bur's
"crawling." Once the entry is made, the bur is maintained to ensure that all external walls are perpendicular to the external tooth surface and thereby parallel
to the enamel rods (Fig. 18-29). Often this requires
changing the orientation of the handpiece to accommodate the cervical mesiodistal and incisogingival (i.e.,

C H A P T E R 18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 18-29 When extending incisally
( A), gingivally (B), mesially (C), and
distally (D), position the bur to prepare these walls perpendicular to external tooth surface.

A

C

occlusogingival) convexity of the tooth. Extend the
preparation incisally, gingivally, mesially, and distally
until the cavosurface margins are positioned in sound
tooth structure to establish an initial axial depth of 0.5
mm inside the DEJ (if on the root surface, the axial
depth is 0.75 mm). When extending mesially and distally, it may be necessary to protect the rubber dam from
the bur by placing a flat-bladed instrument over the
dam (Fig. 18-30). The axial wall should be in sound
dentin, unless there is remaining infected caries or old
restorative material. Preparation of the axial wall depth
0.5 mm inside the DEJ results in a uniform depth for the
entire preparation. Because the axial wall follows the
mesiodistal and incisogingival (i.e., occlusogingival)
contours of the facial surface of the tooth, it will usually
be convex in both directions. In addition, the axial wall
will usually be slightly deeper at the incisal wall, where
there is more enamel (i.e., approximately 1 to 1.25 mm
in depth) than at the gingival wall, where there may be
little or no enamel (i.e., approximately 0.75 to 1 mm in
depth). A depth of 0.5 mm inside the DEJ will permit
placement of necessary retention grooves without undermining the enamel. This subtle difference in depth
serves also to increase the thickness of the remaining
dentin (between the axial wall and the pulp) in the gingival aspect of the preparation to aid in protecting the
pulp. For the tooth preparation that is very extended incisogingivally, the axial wall should be more convex (because it follows the contour of the DEJ).
Alternatively, suitably sized, round carbide burs (usually a No. 2 or 4) may be used for the initial tooth preparation. In fact, round burs are indicated in areas inaccessible to a fissure bur that is held perpendicular to the
tooth surface. If needed, smaller round burs may be
used also to define internal angles in these preparations,
enhancing proper placement of the retention grooves.

D

FIG . 18-30 Flat-bladed instrument protects rubber dam from bur.
Final Tooth Preparation. Final tooth preparation in-

volves removal of any remaining infected dentin, pulp
protection, retention form, finishing external walls, and
final procedures of cleaning, inspecting, and desensitizing or bonding. Remove any remaining infected axial
wall dentin with a No. 2 or No. 4 bur. Any old restorative material (including base and liner) remaining
should not be removed if: (1) there is no clinical or radiographic evidence of recurrent caries, (2) the periphery of
the base and liner is intact, and (3) the tooth is asymptomatic. With proper outline form, the axial line angles
are already in sound dentin. If needed, apply an appropriate liner or base (see Chapter 16).
Because the mesial, distal, gingival, and incisal walls
of the tooth preparation are perpendicular to the external tooth surface, they usually diverge facially. Consequently, this form provides no inherent retention, and
retention form must be provided because the primary
retention form for an amalgam restoration is macromechanical. Use a No. 1/4 bur to prepare two retention
grooves, one along the incisoaxial line angle and the
other along the gingivoaxial line angle (Fig. 18-31). The
handpiece is positioned so that the No. 1/4 bur is directed
generally to bisect the angle formed at the junction of

CHAPTER

18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

FIG

18-31 Retention form. A, A No. '/, bur positioned to prepare gingival retention
groove. B, Gingival retention groove (arrow) prepared along gingivoaxial line angle
generally to bisect the angle formed by the gingival and axial walls. Ideally, the direction of preparation is slightly more gingivally than pulpally. An incisal retention
groove is prepared along incisoaxial line angle and directed similarly. C and
D, Groove is placed with No. '/, bur along gingivoaxial and incisoaxial line angles
0.2 mm inside DEJ and 0.25 mm deep. Note slight pulpal inclination of shank of
No. '/, bur. E, Facial view. F, Incisogingival section. Note that grooves depthwise are
directed mostly incisally (gingivally) and slightly pulpally. G, Mesiodistal section.

the axial wall and the incisal or occlusal) wall. Ideally
the direction of the incisal (i.e., occlusal) groove is
slightly more incisal (i.e., occlusal) than axial, and the
direction of the gingival groove is slightly more gingival
than axial. Alternatively, four retention coves may be
prepared, one in each of the four axial point angles of
the preparation (Fig. 18-32).
Using four coves instead of two full-length grooves
conserves dentin near the pulp, reducing the possibility
of a mechanical pulp exposure. The depth of the grooves

should approximate 0.25 mm, which is half the diameter
of the bur. It is important that the retention grooves be
adequate, because they provide the only retention form
to the preparation. Regardless, the grooves should not
remove dentin immediately supporting the enamel. In a
large Class V amalgam preparation, extending the retention groove circumferentially around all the internal line
angles of the tooth preparation may enhance retention
form. Even if an amalgam bonding technique is used,
mechanical retention is still recommended.

CHAPTER

18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

FIG

18-32 A, Extended Class V tooth preparation with axial wall following DEJ contour
mesiodistally (B) and incisogingivally (C). Note axial wall pulpal depth of 1 mm in crown and
0.75 mm in root. In addition, note location and direction depth (0.25 mm) of retention grooves
and dimension of gingival wall (0.25 mm) from root surface to retention groove. D, Large Class
V preparation with retention coves prepared in the four axial point angles.

If access is inadequate for use of the No. 1/4 bur, a 7-852 1 2 -6 angle former chisel may be used to prepare the retention form. In addition, a No. 33 1 2 bur can be used.
Both methods result in retention grooves that will be angular, but positioned in the same location and approximately to the same depth as when the No. 1/4 bur is used.
However, the rounded retention form placed with the
No. bur is generally preferred, because amalgam can
be condensed into rounded areas better than into sharp
areas, resulting in better adaptation of the amalgam into
the retention grooves. If necessary, use suitable hand instruments (e.g., chisels, margin trimmers) to plane the
enamel margins, verifying soundness and 90-degree
cavosurface angles.
Finally, clean the preparation using air-water spray
and evacuation. Use the air syringe to remove visible
moisture (do not desiccate tooth structure), and inspect
the preparation for completeness. If the preparation is
complete, either apply a desensitizer (for a nonbonded
restoration) or begin the bonding procedures (for a
bonded restoration). (See Sealer or Bonding Application, as well as Chapter 17, for specific information on
amalgam bonding.)
/

/

1/4

Large Preparations That Include Line Angles.

Caries on the facial (i.e., lingual) surface may extend beyond the line angles of the tooth. The maxillary molars,
particularly the second molars, are most commonly affected by these extensive defects (Fig. 18-33, A). In this
example, if the remainder of the distal surface is sound
and the distal caries is accessible facially, the facial
restoration should then extend around the line angle.
This prevents the need for a Class II proximal restoration to restore the distal surface. Complete as much of
the preparation as possible with a fissure bur. Then, using a round bur approximately the same diameter as the
fissure bur, initiate the distal portion of the preparation
(see Fig. 18-33, B and C). Use smaller round burs to ac-

centuate the distal portions internal line angles. Preparing the facial portion first provides better access and visibility to the distal portion. Occasionally, hand instruments may be useful for completing the distal half of the
preparation when space for the handpiece is limited
(see Fig. 18-33, D through F).
Place retention grooves along the entire length of the
occlusoaxial and gingivoaxial line angles to ensure retention of the restoration. Use the No.
bur as previously described to prepare the retention grooves. A gingival margin trimmer or a 7-85-21/2-6 angle former chisel
can be used in the distal half of the preparation to provide retention form when access for the handpiece is
limited (see Fig. 18-33, G and H).
Because of the proximity of the coronoid process, access to the facial surfaces of maxillary molars, particularly second molars, is often limited. Having the patient
partially close and shift the mandible toward the tooth
being operated will improve access and visibility (Fig.
18-34).
If the Class V outline form approaches an existing
proximal restoration, it is better to extend slightly into
the bulk of the proximal restoration, rather than to leave
a thin section of tooth structure between the two
restorations (Fig. 18-35). In this illustration, the previously placed amalgam served as the distal (i.e., mesial)
wall of the preparation.
When proper treatment requires both Class 11 and
Class V amalgam restorations on the same tooth, complete the Class 11 preparation and restoration before initiating the Class V If the Class V were restored first, it
may be damaged by the matrix band and wedge needed
for the Class II restoration.
1/4

RESTORATIVE TECHNIQUE
Sealer or Bonding Application. The same considerations presented earlier in this chapter apply for the

CHAPTER

18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

FIG 18-33 Tooth preparation on maxillary molar. A, Caries extending around distofacial corner of
tooth. B and C, Distal extension is accomplished with round bur. D through F, Gingival margin trimmer may be useful in completing distal half of preparation when handpiece access is limited. G, Gingival margin trimmer may be used to provide retention grooves. H, Angle former chisel may be used
to prepare retention grooves in distal portion of preparation. I, Completed tooth preparation.

FIG 18-34 Mandible shifted laterally for improved access and
visibility.

FIG 18-35 When Class V outline form closely approaches an
existing restoration, extend the preparation to remove remaining thin enamel wall, resulting in adjoining restorations.

Class V amalgam restoration. (Refer to Chapter 17 for a
more complete review on the use of amalgam bonding
techniques.) In vitro studies have shown that bonded
Class V amalgam restorations initially exhibit significantly less leakage than varnish lined restorations.
However, by 1 year there is no difference in the two
groups. 1,3
Matrix Placement. Most Class V amalgam restorations are placed without the use of any type of matrix.
The most difficult condensation occurs in a tooth preparation with an axial wall that is very convex mesiodistally. Two alternative methods for insertion may be
used. The preferred method is the application of a matrix that confines the amalgam in the mesial and distal
portions of the preparation (Fig. 18-36). Short lengths of
stainless steel matrix material, one each for the mesial
and distal surfaces, are passed through the proximal
contacts, carefully guided into the gingival sulcus, and
wedged. The strips must be wide enough to extend occlusally through the respective proximal contacts and
long enough to extend slightly past the facial (i.e., lingual) line angles. The strip usually requires compound
support for stability and rigidity. It is often helpful to
apply a small amount of softened compound on the tip
of the wedge before wedge insertion. The strips offer resistance against condensing the mesial and distal portions, which provides support for condensing the center
of the restoration. The gingival edge of the steel strip often must be trimmed to conform to the circumferential
contour (level) of the base of the gingival sulcus to pre-

C H A P T E R 18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

vent soft-tissue damage. Rather than using two short
pieces of steel strip, a longer length can be used that
may be passed through one proximal contact, extended
around the lingual (i.e., facial) surface, and passed
through the other contact, forming a U-shaped matrix.
Trimming the gingival edge to conform to the interproximal soft-tissue anatomy usually is more difficult
with one matrix strip than when two strips are used.

FIG 18-36 Application of matrix to confine amalgam in
mesial and distal extensions of preparation.

FIG 18-37 Customized matrix band
used to restore area of proximal root
caries. A, Conventional Tofflemire
matrix with window cut into band
to allow access for condensation.
B, Matrix in place around the tooth, all owing lingual access to preparation.
A

FIG 18-38 Inserting amalgam. A,
Place amalgam into preparation in
small increments. B, Condense first
i nto retention grooves with small
condenser. C, Next condense against
mesial and distal walls. D, Overfill
and provide sufficient bulk to allow
for carving.

A conventional Tofflemire band and retainer may be
used with a window cut into the band allowing access
to the preparation for condensation (Fig. 18-37). Alternatively, the tooth may be prepared and restored in sections without using a matrix. Each successive section of
the preparation should be extended slightly into the
previously condensed portion to ensure caries removal.
This procedure is time consuming but effective.
Condensation and Carving. Using the amalgam carrier, insert the mixed amalgam into the preparation in
small increments (Fig. 18-38, A) and condense it into the
retention areas first, with an appropriately sized condenser (see Fig. 18-38, B). Next, condense the amalgam
against the mesial and distal walls of the preparation
(see Fig. 18-38, C). Finally, provide sufficient bulk in the
central portion to allow for carving the correct contour
(see Fig. 18-38, D). As the surface of the restoration becomes more convex, condensation becomes increasingly
difficult. The operator must guard against the amalgam's "land sliding" during over packing. A large condenser or plastic instrument held against the amalgam
may help resist pressure applied elsewhere on the
restoration (Fig. 18-39).
Carving may begin immediately after insertion of the
amalgam (Fig. 18-40). All carving should be done using
the side of the explorer tine or a Hollenback No. 3 carver

CHAPTER

18

held parallel to the margins. In addition, the side of the
carving instrument should always rest on unprepared
tooth surface adjacent to the prepared cavosurface margin. This prevents overcarving. Begin the carving procedure by removing excess amalgam to expose the incisal
(or occlusal) margin. Continue removing excess to expose the mesial and distal margins. Finally, carve away
excess at the gingival margin. Carving the marginal areas should result in developing the desired convex contours in the completed restoration. Improper use of the
carving instruments will result in a poorly contoured
restoration. Note in Fig. 18-41 how carving instruments
are positioned to provide the desired contours. There
should be no amalgam excess at the margins, because it
may either break away, creating a defect at the margin,
or cause gingival irritation.
There are instances when it is appropriate to change
facial contours because of altered soft-tissue levels (e.g.,
cervical lesions in periodontally treated patients). Facial
contours may be increased (or relocated) only enough to
prevent food impaction into the gingival sulcus and to
provide access for the patient to clean the area. Over-

FIG . 18-39 Use large condenser or flat-bladed instrument to
offer resistance to condensation pressure applied elsewhere
on restoration.

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

contouring must be avoided, because it will result in reduced stimulation and cleansing of the gingiva during
mastication.
When a rubber dam and the No. 212 cervical retainer
are used for isolation, clean the area well with an airwater syringe and explorer to remove any amalgam
particles, particularly in the sulcus. Then, remove the
No. 212 retainer using care to open the jaws of the retainer wide enough to prevent marring the surface of
the restoration. Remove the rubber dam, and again
clean the area well to ensure that no amalgam particles
remain in the sulcus.
When retraction cord is used for isolation, it may interfere with carving any excess amalgam at the gingival
margin. If so, carve away gross excess, carefully remove
the cord, and then complete the final carving along the
margin.
Finishing and Polishing. If carving procedures were
performed correctly, no finishing of the restoration
should be required. A slightly moistened cotton pellet
held in the operative pliers may be used to further
smooth the carved restoration. However, additional finishing and polishing of amalgam restorations may be
necessary to correct a marginal discrepancy or improve
the contour. Care is required when using stones or any
rotating cutting instruments on margins positioned below the cementoenamel junction (CEJ). This is because
of the possibility of removing cementum or notching the
tooth structure gingival to the margin or both (Fig.
18-42). Fig. 18-43 illustrates reshaping a rubber abrasive
point to allow optimal access to the gingival portion of
a Class V amalgam restoration. However, polishing
restorations of high-copper amalgam is unnecessary, because
high-copper amalgam is less prone to corrosion and marginal
deterioration than its low-copper predecessor. Nevertheless,

FIG . 18-40 Carving and contouring
restoration. A, Begin carving procedure by removing excess and locati ng incisal margin. B and C, Explorer
may be used to remove excess and
l ocate mesial and distal margins.
D, Finally, remove excess and locate
gingival margin.

C H A P T E R 18

Classes III and V Amalgam Restorations

FIG 18-41 Position of carving instrument to prevent overcarving amalgam and to develop desired gingival contours.

FIG 18-42 Incorrect use of pointed stone at gingival margin results in removal
of cementum or notching of tooth structure gingival to margin or both.

FIG . 18-43 Reshaping a rubber abrasive point against a mounted carborundum disk.

some operators prefer to polish all amalgam restorations to obtain a glossy surface. (The polishing technique is presented in Chapter 17.)
REFERENCES
1. Ben-Amar A, Liberman R Rothkoff Z, Cardash HS: Longterm sealing properties of Amalgam bond under amalgam
restorations, Am J Dent 7:141, 1994.
2. Berry FA et al: Microleakage of amalgam restorations using
dentin-bonding system primers, Am J Dent 9:174, 1996.

3. Moore DS, Johnson WW, Kaplan 1: A comparison of amalgam
microleakage with a 4-META liner and copal varnish, Int
J Prosthodont 8:461, 1995.
4. Setcos JC, Staninec M, Wilson NHF: Bonding of amalgam
restorations: existing knowledge and future prospects, Oper
Dent 25:121, 2000.
5. Smales RJ, Wetherell JD: Review of bonded amalgam restorations and assessment in a general practice over five years,
Oper Dent 25:374, 2000.

I.

I ntroduction, 765
A. Review of pertinent material qualities and
properties, 765
B. Indications, 765
1. Resistance and retention forms, 765
2. Status and prognosis of the tooth, 765
3. Role of the tooth in the overall treatment
plan, 765
4. Occlusion, esthetics, and economics, 765
5. Age and health of the patient, 766
C. Contraindications, 766
D. Advantages, 766
1. Conserves tooth structure, 766
2. Appointment time, 766
3. Resistance and retention forms, 766
4. Economics, 766
E. Disadvantages, 766
1. Dentinal microfractures, 766
2. Microleakage, 766
3. Decreased strength of amalgam, 766
4. Resistance form, 766
5. Penetration and perforation, 766
6. Tooth anatomy, 766

II.

III.

Clinical technique, 766
A. Initial procedures summary, 766
1. Pin-retained amalgam restorations, 766
2. Slot-retained amalgam restorations, 767
3. Amalgam foundations, 768
B. Tooth preparation, 769
1. Tooth preparation for pin-retained amalgam
restorations, 769
2. Tooth preparation for slot-retained amalgam restorations, 785
3. Tooth preparation for amalgam foundations, 786
C. Restorative technique, 787
1. Use of desensitizer or bonding system, 787
2. Matrix placement, 787
3. Inserting the amalgam, 791
4. Contouring and finishing the amalgam, 795
Summary, 795

CHAPTER 19

I NTRODUCTION

This chapter describes the use of amalgam for complex
direct posterior restorations. Chapter 13 described the
use of composite for complex posterior restorations.
Complex posterior restorations are used to replace missing tooth structure of teeth that have fractured or are severely involved with caries or existing restorative material. These restorations usually involve the replacement
of one or more missing cusps, and often, they utilize a
bonding technique.
REVIEW OF PERTINENT MATERIAL QUALITIES
AND PROPERTIES

The properties, advantages and limitations of amalgam
are discussed in Chapters 4 and 16. Amalgam is easy to
use and has a high compressive strength, excellent wear
resistance, and a proven long-term clinical performance.
However, it is metallic (unesthetic), requires a retentive
tooth preparation, and does not seal or strengthen the
tooth.
I NDICATIONS

Complex posterior amalgam restorations should be considered when large amounts of tooth structure are missing, when one or more cusps need capping, and when
increased resistance and retention forms are needed.
They may be used as: (1) control restorations in teeth
that have a questionable pulpal and/or periodontal
prognosis, (2) control restorations in teeth with acute
and severe caries, (3) definitive final restorations, or (4)
foundations. When determining the appropriateness of
a complex amalgam restoration, the factors discussed in
the following sections must be considered.
Resistance and Retention Forms. In a tooth severely involved with caries or existing restorative material, any undermined enamel or weak tooth structure
subject to fracture must be removed and restored. Usually, a weakened tooth is best restored with a properly
designed indirect (usually cast) restoration that will prevent tooth fracture caused by mastication forces (see
Chapter 20). However, in selected cases, preparations
may be designed for amalgam that improve the resistance form of a tooth (Fig. 19-1).
When conventional retention features are not adequate because of insufficient remaining tooth structure,
pins, slots, and amalgam bonding techniques may be

FIG 19-1 Maxillary second premolar weakened both by extensive caries and by the
small fracture line extending mesiodistally
on the center of the excavated dentinal
wall. A, Minikin pins placed in the gingival
floor will improve resistance form after
amalgam has been placed. Note that a calcium hydroxide liner has been placed (c).
B, Restorations polished.

Complex Amalgam Restorations

used to enhance retention form. The retention features
needed depend on the amount of tooth structure remaining and the tooth being restored. As more tooth
structure is lost, more auxiliary retention is required.
Pins, slots, and bonding also provide additional resistance form to the restoration.
Status and Prognosis of the Tooth. A tooth with severe caries that may require endodontic therapy or
crown lengthening or that has an uncertain periodontal
prognosis is often treated initially with a control restoration. A control restoration helps: (1) protect the pulp
from the oral cavity (i.e., fluids, thermal stresses, pH
changes, bacteria), (2) provide an anatomic contour
against which the gingival tissue may be healthier,
(3) facilitate control of caries and plaque, and (4) provide some resistance against tooth fracture (or propagation of an existing fracture). (Refer to Chapter 3 for
caries control rationale and techniques. )
The status and prognosis of the tooth will determine
the size, number, and placement of retention features.
Larger restorations generally require more retention.
However, the size, number, and location of retention
features demand greater care in smaller teeth, in teeth
that have been significantly excavated, and in symptomatic teeth. Carelessness can risk pulpal irritation or
exposure.
Role of the Tooth in the Overall Treatment Plan.

The restorative treatment choice for a tooth is influenced by its role in the overall treatment plan. Although
complex amalgam restorations are used occasionally as
an alternative to indirect restorations, they often are indicated for other purposes. Abutment teeth for fixed
prostheses may utilize a complex restoration as a foundation. Extensive caries or previous restorations on
abutment teeth for removable prostheses generally indicate a cast restoration for resistance and retention forms
and for development of external surface contours for retention of the prosthesis. A tooth may be treated with a
complex restoration if adequate resistance and retention
forms can be provided. For periodontal and orthodontic
patients, the complex restoration may be the restoration
of choice until the final phase of treatment when cast
restorations may be preferred.
Occlusion, Esthetics, and Economics. Complex
amalgam restorations are sometimes indicated as
interim restorations for teeth that require elaborate

CHAPTER

19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

occlusal alterations ranging from vertical dimension
changes to correcting occlusal plane discrepancies.
When esthetics is a primary consideration, a complex
amalgam restoration may not be the treatment of choice
because of the display of metal. However, a more esthetic result may be obtained by inserting a composite
veneer within the amalgam to mask some of the metallic appearance of the restoration (see Chapter 15). 57
When cost of indirect restorations is a major factor for
the patient, the complex direct amalgam restoration
may be an appropriate treatment option, provided that
adequate resistance and retention forms are included.
Age and Health of the Patient. For some geriatric
and debilitated patients, the complex amalgam restoration may be the treatment of choice over the more expensive and time-consuming cast restoration.
CONTRAINDICATIONS
The complex amalgam restoration may be contraindicated if the patient has significant occlusal problems, or
if the tooth cannot be properly restored with a direct
restoration because of anatomic and/or functional considerations. The complex amalgam restoration also may
be contraindicated if the area to be restored is esthetically important for the patient.
ADVANTAGES
Conserves Tooth Structure. The preparation for a
complex amalgam restoration is usually more conservative than the preparation for an indirect restoration or a
crown.
Appointment Time. The complex restoration can be
completed in one appointment. The cast restoration requires at least two appointments.
Resistance and Retention Forms. Resistance and retention forms may be significantly increased by the use
of pins, slots, and bonding (see Fig. 19-1).
Economics. Compared to an indirect restoration, the
amalgam restoration is a relatively inexpensive restorative procedure. When cost is a factor, the complex amalgam restoration may provide the patient with the only
alternative to extraction of the severely broken-down
tooth. Martin and Bader 39 have published that 72% and
65% of four- and five-surface complex amalgams, respectively, are successful at 5 years compared with 84%
of both gold and porcelain crowns. Smales 62 reported
that 72% of amalgam restorations survived for 15 years,
including those with cusp coverage.

DISADVANTAGES
Most of the disadvantages related to complex amalgam
restorations refer to the use of pins used to provide
retention for these restorations. However, some disadvantages apply to complex amalgam restorations in general.
Dentinal Microfractures. Preparing pinholes and
placing pins may create craze lines or fractures, as well

as internal stresses in the dentin. 5-66,72 Such craze lines
and internal stress may have little or no clinical significance, but they may be important when minimal dentin
is present.
Microleakage. In amalgam restorations using cavity
varnish, microleakage around all types of pins has been
demonstrated . 43 In vitro studies have demonstrated that
microleakage of amalgam restorations using bonding systems is significantly reduced . 60,63 However, no clinically
significant difference was found in conventional and
bonded amalgams at ages ranging from 1 to 5 years.
Decreased Strength of Amalgam. The tensile
strength and horizontal strength of pin-retained amalgam restorations are significantly decreased . 27,73
Resistance Form. Resistance form is more difficult
to develop than when preparing a tooth for a cuspcapping onlay (skirting axial line angles of the tooth) or
a full crown. The complex amalgam restoration does not
protect the tooth from fracture as well as an extracoronal restoration. However, amalgam restorations with
cusp coverage significantly increase the fracture resistance of weakened teeth as compared to amalgam
restorations without cusp coverage.
Penetration and Perforation. Pin retention increases
the risk of penetrating into the pulp or perforating the
external tooth surface.
Tooth Anatomy. Proper contours and occlusal contacts, and/or anatomy, are sometimes difficult to
achieve with large complex restorations.
CLINICAL TECHNIQUE
In this chapter, the word vertical is used in lieu of the
word longitudinal to describe tooth preparation walls
and other preparation aspects that are approximately
parallel to the long axis of the tooth. The word horizontal is used in lieu of the word transverse to describe the
walls and other aspects that are approximately perpendicular to the long axis of the tooth.
I NITIAL PROCEDURES SUMMARY
Treatment options should be discussed with the patient.
Before the preparation for a complex amalgam restoration begins, an explanation of the procedure should be
given to the patient. The limitations of the restoration itself and the possible complications that might occur
during the procedure also should be presented. The initial procedures for each of the complex amalgam
restoration types will be briefly discussed before the
technique is presented. Usually, each type of complex
amalgam restoration utilizes a bonding technique. If
bonding is used, a precise technique and isolated operating field must be present.
Pin-Retained Amalgam Restorations. A pinretained restoration may be defined as any restoration
requiring the placement of one or more pins in the
dentin to provide adequate resistance and retention

CHAPTER 1 9

Complex Amalgam Restorations

fig
19-2 A, Maxillary canine with extensive loss of tooth structure using pins for
additional retention form. B, Restoration
polished.

FIG. . 19-3 Using light-cured composite to restore fractured mandibular lateral incisor. A, Cavosurface bevel prepared at 45 degrees to external enamel surface, and liner of calcium hydroxi de applied. B, Minikin pins placed and enamel etched. C, Restoration completed.

forms. Pins are used whenever adequate resistance and
retention forms cannot be established with slots, locks,
or undercuts only. The pin-retained amalgam is an important adjunct in the restoration of teeth with extensive
caries or fractures. 47 Amalgam restorations including
pins have significantly greater retention than those using
boxes only or those relying solely on bonding systems.
Although this chapter focuses on large Class II
restorations, pins have been used in other types of large
restorations. The indication for pins in a Class IV
restoration is rare. Because of the relatively small size of
anterior teeth and the potential for enamel and dentin
bonding, pins are used rarely in anterior teeth or with
composite restorative materials. Occasionally, the use of
pins may be considered for a large Class IV preparation
on the distal surface of a canine that involves a significant amount of the distoincisal corner (Fig. 19-2), when
this area is being restored with amalgam. Pins placed in
the gingival portion may provide the needed retention
for the restoration. However, use of a lingual dovetail as
described in Chapter 18 is an alternative to pin retention, if enough lingual tooth structure is available for
preparation of the dovetail.
Because of effective bonding to enamel and dentin,
the need for pins in tooth preparations for direct composite restorations has virtually been eliminated. Proper
use of bonding technique and selectively placed retention features usually provide adequate retention for
composite restorations. The use of pins may be considered for a tooth that has insufficient enamel present for
acid-etching, and/or insufficient remaining tooth structure for adequate retention features (Fig. 19-3). Ideally,
such a tooth should be restored with an esthetic crown.

However, economics or time constraints may dictate the
placement of a direct composite restoration. (Refer to
Chapters 11, 12, and 13 for descriptions of composite
restorations.)
The indication for pins in a Class V restoration is rare,
if ever. Adequate retention can usually be achieved by
the placement of a horizontal groove in the gingival and
occlusal aspect of the preparation.
Slot-Retained Amalgam Restorations. For a complex restoration, a slot is a retention groove in dentin
whose length is in a horizontal plane (Fig. 19-4). Slot retention may be used in conjunction with pin retention,
or as an alternative to it. Because of the varying preparation forms of teeth requiring complex amalgam
restorations, the operator should be familiar with both
slot retention and pin retention.
Fig. 19-5 illustrates the use of coves (placed with a
No. '/4 bur) to provide additional retention form in a
preparation that utilizes pins. Coves also may be used
for preparations utilizing slots (see Fig. 19-4). Proximal
locks, as described in Chapter 17, also are placed in the
proximal box and in other locations where sufficient
vertical tooth preparation permits (Figs. 19-6 and 19-7).
Some operators use slot retention and pin retention
interchangeably. However, others more frequently use
slot retention in preparations with vertical walls that allow retention locks to oppose one another. Pin retention
is used more frequently in preparations with few or no
vertical walls. Slots are particularly indicated in short
clinical crowns and in cusps that have been reduced
2 to 3 mm for amalgam. Compared with pin placement,
more tooth structure is removed preparing slots. However, slots are less likely to create microfractures in the

CHAPTER

19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG. 19-4 Slots. A and B, With a No. 33 1/2 bur, prepare dentinal slots approximately 0.6 mm deep
and 0.5 to 1 mm inside dentinoenamel junction.

FIG 19-5 Prepare coves in dentin with No. Y, bur where
appropriate.
FIG 19-7 Prepare vertical locks in dentin with a No. 169L bur
where appropriate.

FIG. 19-6 A retention lock is a prepared groove whose length
i s in a vertical plane and which is in dentin.

dentin and to perforate the tooth or penetrate into the
pulp. Felton and others 22 reported that medium-sized
self-threading pins elicited an inflammatory pulpal response if placed within 0.5 mm of the pulp. Slots placed
in the same location did not . 22 Several authors found no
significant difference in the retention provided by slots

and pins in vitro 2-52,53 and in vivo.` In contrast, Pashley
and associates55 reported that the shear strength of pin
retention was significantly stronger than slot retention.
Amalgam Foundations. A foundation is an initial
restoration of a severely involved tooth. The tooth is restored so that the restorative material (amalgam, composite, or other) will serve in lieu of tooth structure to
provide retention and resistance forms during the development of the subsequent final cast restoration. Thus
a foundation is indicated for a tooth that is severely broken down and lacks the resistance and retention forms
needed for an indirect restoration. The retention of the
foundation material should not be compromised by
tooth reduction during the final preparation for the indirect restoration. The foundation also should provide
resistance form against forces that otherwise might fracture the remaining tooth structure.

CHAPTER

Unlike a conventional amalgam restoration, an amalgam foundation may not depend primarily on remaining coronal tooth structure for support. Instead, it may
rely mainly on secondary preparation retention features
(pins, slots, coves, and proximal retention locks) and
somewhat on bonding benefits. A temporary or caries
control restoration may serve as a foundation, but only
if the retention and resistance forms of the restoration
are appropriate.
A temporary or caries control restoration is used to restore a tooth temporarily and/or to control caries in a
tooth when definitive treatment is uncertain or when
several teeth require immediate attention for control of
caries. It also may be used when a tooth's prognosis is
questionable. However, a temporary or control restoration may depend only on the remaining coronal tooth
structure for support, using few auxiliary retention features. When preparing a tooth for either a foundation or
temporary (control) restoration, remaining unsupported
enamel may be left, except at the gingival, to aid in forming a matrix for amalgam condensation. In each case, remaining unsupported enamel is removed when the indirect restoration is placed. Occasionally, when providing
a temporary or control restoration, the operator also may
elect to provide sufficient retention and resistance forms
to satisfy the requirements of a foundation.
As a rule, foundations are placed in preparation for a
full crown, especially in endodontically treated teeth.
However, not all teeth with foundations must be immediately restored with full coverage crowns. Smith and
Schuman have reported that amalgam may be used as a
definitive partial coverage restoration if only minimal
coronal damage has occurred in endodontically treated
teeth. The greatest influence on fracture resistance is
the amount of remaining tooth structure.
The restorative materials used for foundations include amalgam, composite, and reinforced glassionomer cermets. Of the direct filling materials, amalgam is preferred because it is easy to use and stronger
than composite or cermets. Threaded pins and slots can
be used for retention in vital teeth, as described in later
sections. Prefabricated posts and cast post and cores
also may be used to provide additional retention for the
foundation material in endodontically treated teeth receiving foundations. The use of prefabricated post and
cast post and cores is limited to endodontically treated
teeth, and is used generally on anterior teeth or singlecanal premolars with little or no remaining coronal
tooth structure. On endodontically treated molars the
pulp chamber and/or canals typically provide retention
for the foundation, and it is not necessary to use any
form of intraradicular retention (see Tooth Preparation
for Amalgam Foundations later in this chapter).
Before tooth preparation, evaluate occlusal factors,
administer local anesthetic, and apply the rubber dam,
if needed.

19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

TOOTH PREPARATION
Tooth Preparation for Pin-Retained Amalgam
Restorations
Initial Tooth Preparation. The general concept of the

initial tooth preparation is presented in Chapter 17, and
it applies for the pin-retained complex amalgam
restorations described here.
When caries is extensive, reduction of one or more of
the cusps for capping may be indicated (capping cusps).
Robbins and Summit and Smales have documented
the longevity of complex amalgam restorations involving one or more capped cusps. These authors report a
survival rate of 72% after 15 years. In fact, Smales 62 did
not find any difference in the survival rate of cuspcovered and non-cusp-covered amalgam restorations at
15 years, regardless of whether pins were used. When
the facial or lingual extension exceeds two thirds the
distance from a primary groove toward the cusp tip (or
when the facial-lingual extension of the occlusal preparation exceeds two thirds the distance between the facial
and lingual cusp tips), reduction of the cusp(s) for amalgam is usually required for the development of adequate resistance form (Fig. 19-8, A), as in preparations
for cast metal restorations. Reduction should be accomplished during initial tooth preparation because it improves access and visibility for subsequent steps. If the
cusp(s) to be capped is located at the correct occlusal
height before preparation, depth cuts should be made
on the remaining occlusal surface of each cusp to be
capped, using the side of a carbide fissure bur or a suitable diamond instrument (see Fig. 19-8, B). The depth
cuts should be 2 mm deep minimum for functional
cusps and 1.5 mm deep minimum for nonfunctional
cusps." However, to correct an occlusal relationship, if
the unreduced cusp(s) height is located less than the
correct occlusal height, the depth cuts may be less. Likewise, if the unreduced cusp(s) height is located at more
than the correct occlusal height, the depth cuts may be
deeper. The goal is to ensure that the final restoration
has restored cusps with a minimal thickness of 2 mm of
amalgam for functional cusps and 1.5 mm of amalgam
for nonfunctional cusps (see Fig. 19-8, C), while developing an appropriate occlusal relationship. Using the
depth cuts as a guide, the reduction is completed to provide for a uniform reduction of tooth structure (see Fig.
19-8, D). The occlusal contour of the reduced cusp
should be similar to the normal contour of the unreduced cusp. Any sharp internal corners of the tooth
preparation formed at the junction of prepared surfaces
should be rounded to reduce stress concentration in the
amalgam and thus improve its resistance to fracture
from occlusal forces (see Fig. 19-8, E). When reducing
only one of two facial or lingual cusps, the cusp reduction should be extended just past the facial or lingual
groove, creating a vertical wall against the adjacent
unreduced cusp. Fig. 19-8, F and G, illustrate a final

C H A P T E R 19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

restoration. The procedure for capping the distolingual
cusp of a maxillary first molar is illustrated in Fig. 17-70.
Extending the facial or lingual wall of a proximal box to
include the entire cusp is indicated only when necessary
to include carious or unsupported tooth structure or existing restorative material. The typical extension of the
proximal box for restoring an entire cusp is illustrated in
Figs. 17-71 and 17-72, B.
When possible, opposing vertical walls should be
formed to converge occlusally, to enhance primary retention form. Also, a facial or lingual groove may be extended arbitrarily to increase retention form. The pulpal
and gingival walls should be relatively flat and perpendicular to the long axis of the tooth.
Final Tooth Preparation. After initial tooth preparation of a severely involved tooth, removal of any remaining infected carious dentin or removal of remain-

ing old restorative material is usually necessary and is
accomplished as described previously. A liner can be applied, if needed, and, if used, should not extend closer
than 1 mm to a slot or a pin.
Pins placed into prepared pinholes (also referred to as
pin channels) provide auxiliary resistance and retention
forms. As described in Chapter 17, coves and retention
locks should be prepared, when possible (Figs. 19-9, A
and C, and 19-10). Coves are prepared in a horizontal
plane and locks are prepared in a vertical plane. These
locks and coves should be prepared before preparing
pinholes and inserting pins. Cusp reduction significantly diminishes retention form by decreasing the
height of the vertical walls. When additional retention is
indicated, pins may be inserted in carefully positioned
pinholes increasing retention. Slots may be prepared
along the gingival floor, axial to the dentinoenamel

FIG. 19-8 Capping cusp with amalgam. A, Comparison of mesial aspects of normally extended
(left) and extensive (right) mesioocclusodistal tooth preparation. Note that the resistance form
of the mesiolingual cusp of extensive preparation is compromised and indicated for capping
with amalgam. B, Preparing depth cuts. C, Depth cuts prepared. D, Reducing cusp. E, Cusp reduced. F and G, Final restoration.

CHAPTER

j unction (DEJ) instead of, or in addition to, pinholes (see
Fig. 19-9, B). Slot preparation is discussed later in this
chapter.
Types of Pins. The most frequently used pin type is
the small self-threading pin. Friction-locked and cemented pins, although still available, are rarely used
(Fig. 19-11). The pin-retained amalgam restoration using
self-threading pins was originally described by Going in
1966. 26 The diameter of the prepared pinhole is 0.0015
inch to 0.004 inch smaller than the diameter of the pin
(Table 19-1). The threads engage the dentin as it is inserted, retaining the pin. The elasticity (resiliency) of the
dentin permits insertion of a threaded pin into a hole
of smaller diameter. -14 Although the threads of selfthreading pins do not engage the dentin for their entire
width, the self-threading pin is the most retentive of the

FIG 19-9

Locks (A), slots (8), and coves (C).

19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

three types of pins (Fig. 19 - 12),56 being three to six times
more retentive than the cemented pin . Vertical and
horizontal stresses can be generated in the dentin when
a self-threading pin is inserted. However, craze lines in
the dentin are related to the size of the pin. Dilts et all'
have reported that insertion of 0.031-inch self-threading
pins produces more dentinal craze lines than insertion
of either 0.021-inch self-threading pins or 0.022-inch
friction-lock pins. However, Pameijer and Stallard54
have shown that self-threading pins do not create dentinal crazing and that the crazing demonstrated in other
studies may be caused by the technique used for preparation of the specimen. Pulpal stress is maximal when
the self-threading pin is inserted perpendicular to the
pulp. The depth of the pinhole varies from 1.3 to 2 mm,
depending on the diameter of the pin used. 16 However,
a general guideline for pinhole depth is 2 mm. Several
styles of self-threading pins also are available. Because
of its: (1) versatility, (2) wide range of pin sizes, (3) colorcoding system, (4) greater retentiveness; 1 30 and (5) goldplated surface finish, which may eliminate the possibility of corrosion, the Thread Mate System (TMS)
( Coltene/Whaledent Inc., Mahwah, New Jersey) is the
most widely used self-threading pin.
In 1958 Markley" described a technique for restoring
teeth with amalgam and cemented pins using threaded
(or serrated) stainless steel pins. They are cemented into
pinholes prepared 0.001 to 0.002 inch (0.025 to 0.05 mm)
larger than the diameter of the pin. The cementing
medium may be any standard dental luting agent.
In 1966, Goldstein" described a technique for the
friction-locked pin in which the diameter of the prepared

FIG 19-10

Placement of retention locks.
A, Position of No. 169L bur to prepare retention lock. B, Lock prepared with No.'/, bur.

FIG . 19-11

Three types of pins. A, Cemented. B,
Friction-locked. C, Self-threading.

C H A P T E R 19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

pinhole is 0.001 inch (0.025 mm) smaller than the diameter of the pin. The pins are tapped into place, retained
by the resiliency of the dentin, and are 2 to 3 times more
retentive than cemented pins .
Factors Affecting the Retention of the Pin in Dentin
and Amalgam
Type. In the order of retentiveness in the dentin, the
self-threading pin is the most retentive the frictionlocked pin is intermediate, and the cemented pin is the
least retentive.
Surface characteristics. The number and depth of
the elevations (serrations or threads) on the pin influence retention of the pin in the amalgam restoration.
The shape of the self-threading pin gives it the greatest
retention value.
Orientation, number, and diameter. Placing pins in
a nonparallel manner increases their retention. Bending
pins to improve retention in amalgam is not desirable
because bends may interfere with adequate condensation of amalgam around the pin and thereby decrease
amalgam retention. Bending also may weaken the pin
and risk fracturing the dentin. Pins should be bent only
to provide for an adequate amount of amalgam (ap-

FIG

19-12 Complete width of threads of self-threading pins
does not engage dentin.
TMS Pins

proximately 1 mm) between the pin and the external
surface of the finished restoration (both on the tip of the
pin and on its lateral surface). Only the specific bending
tool should be used to bend a pin, not other hand
instruments.
In general, increasing the number of pins increases
the retention in dentin and amalgam. However, the benefits of increasing the number of pins must be compared
to the potential problems created. As the number of pins
increases: (1) the crazing of the dentin and the potential
for fracture increase, (2) the amount of available dentin
between the pins decreases; and (3) the strength of the
amalgam restoration decreases.
Also generally, as the diameter of the pin increases,
the retention in dentin and amalgam increases. However, as the number, depth, and diameter of pins increase, the danger of perforating into the pulp or the external tooth surface increases. A large number of long
pins also can severely compromise condensation of the
amalgam and the amalgam's adaptation to the pins. A
pin technique should be used that permits optimal retention with minimal danger to the remaining tooth
structure.
Horizontal pins can be used for cross-splinting to
provide effective reinforcement of weak remaining
cusps.
However, horizontal pins are not generally
recommended because of limited access for pin placement and for condensation once pins are placed.
Extension into dentin and amalgam. For selfthreading pins, retention is not increased significantly when the depth of the pin into dentin exceeds
2 mm. A laboratory study demonstrated that a 0.024-inch
(0.61 mm) self-threading pin fractures when removal
from an embedment greater than 2 mm is attempted,
while removal of the 0.031-inch (0.78 mm) self-threading

C H A P T E R 19

pin results in fracture of the dentin. 42 Likewise, when
the length of a 0.024-inch (0.61 mm) self-threading pin
extends into the amalgam more than 2 mm and removal
is attempted, the pin fractures. Removal of a 0.031-inch
(0.78 mm) self-threading pin extending more than 2 mm
into the amalgam results in fracture of the amalgam .42

Therefore pin extension into dentin and amalgam greater
than 2 mm is unnecessary for pin retention and is contraindicated to preserve the strength of the dentin and the
amalgam.

Pin Placement Factors and Techniques
Pin size. Four sizes of pins are available (Fig. 19-13),
each with a corresponding color-coded drill (see Table
19-1). Familiarity with drill sizes and their corresponding color is necessary to ensure the proper size pinhole
is prepared for the desired pin. It is difficult to specify a
particular size of pin that is always appropriate for a
particular tooth. Two determining factors for selecting
the appropriate size pin are the amount of dentin available to safely receive the pin and the amount of retention desired. In the Thread Mate System, the pins of
choice for severely involved posterior teeth are the
Minikin (0.019 inch [0.48 mm]) and, occasionally, the
Minim (0.024 inch [0.61 mm]). The Minikin pins usually
are selected to reduce the risk of dentin crazing, pulpal
penetration, and potential perforation. The Minim pins
usually are used as a backup in cases where the pinhole
for the Minikin was overprepared or the pin threads
stripped the dentin during placement and the Minikin
pin lacks retention. Dilts et al reported that the larger diameter pins have the greatest retention. 13 Other studies
showed that the Minuta pin is approximately half as retentive as the Minim and one third as retentive as the
Minim pin.21,30 Either the Minikin or Minim pins can be

Complex Amalgam Restorations

used in a given tooth, depending on the dentin available
in the area where the pins are to be inserted. The Minuta (0.015 inch [0.38 mm]) pin is usually too small to
provide adequate retention in posterior teeth. The Regular (0.031 inch [0.78 mm]) or largest diameter pin is
rarely used because a significant amount of stress and
crazing, or cracking, in the tooth (dentin and enamel)
may be created during its insertion.
Of the four pin
sizes, the Regular pin caused the highest incidence of
dentinal cracking that communicated with the pulp
chamber. 72
Number of pins. Several factors must be considered
when deciding how many pins are required: (1) the
amount of missing tooth structure, (2) the amount of
dentin available to receive pins safely, (3) the amount of
retention required, and (4) the size of the pins. As a rule,
one pin per missing axial line angle should be used. Certain
factors may cause the operator to alter this rule. The
fewest pins possible should be used to achieve the desired retention for a given restoration. When only 2 to 3
mm of the occlusogingival height of a cusp has been removed, no pin is required because enough tooth structure remains to use conventional retention features (Fig.
19-14; see also Fig. 19-8).
Remember that while the retention of the restoration
increases as the number of pins increases, an excessive
number of pins can fracture the tooth and significantly
weaken the amalgam restoration.
Location. Several factors aid in determining pinhole
locations: (1) knowledge of normal pulp anatomy and
external tooth contours, (2) a current radiograph of the
tooth, (3) a periodontal probe, and (4) the patient's age.
Although the radiograph is only a two-dimensional picture of the tooth, it can give an indication of the position

FIG . 19-13 Four sizes of TMS pins. A, Regular
( 0.031 inch [0.78 mm]). B, Minim (0.024 inch [0.61
mm]). C, Minikin (0.019 inch [0.48 mm]). D, Minuta
( 0.015 inch [0.38 mm]).

C H A P T E R 19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 19-14 Examples illustrating reduction of cusps without
need for pin or pins. A, Mandibular first premolar with lingual
cusp reduced for capping. B, Maxillary second molar prepared
for restoration of mesial and distal surfaces and distofacial
cusp.

of the pulp chamber, and the contour of the mesial and
distal surfaces of the tooth. Consideration also must be
given to the placement of pins in areas where the greatest bulk of amalgam will occur to minimize the weakening effect of the pins to tooth structure. Areas of occlusal contacts on the restoration must be anticipated
because a pin oriented vertically and positioned directly
below an occlusal load weakens the amalgam significantly' Occlusal clearance should be sufficient to provide 2 mm of amalgam over the pin.
Several attempts have been made to identify the ideal
location of the pinhole. Caputo and Standee8 state that,
ideally, pinholes should be located halfway between the
pulp and the DEJ or external surface of the tooth root.
Standlee and others have shown that there should be
at least 1 mm of sound dentin around the circumference
of the pinhole. Such location ensures the proper stress
distribution of occlusal forces. Felton and associates 22
have demonstrated that pin placement providing at
least 1 mm of remaining dentin thickness from the pulp
elicits minimal pulpal inflammatory response .22 Dilts
and associates" have reported that pinholes should be
placed at 0.5 mm inside the DEJ.
Because it is difficult to comply exactly with these
conditions, the following philosophy may be more practical. In the cervical one third of molars and premolars (where
most pins are located), pinholes should be located near the line
angles of the tooth, except as described later. 11,29 The pinhole
should be positioned no closer than 0.5 to 1 mm to the DEJ or
no closer than 1 to 1.5 mm to the external surface of the tooth,
whichever distance is greater (Fig. 19-15). Before the final

decision is made about the location of the pinhole, the
operator should carefully probe the gingival crevice to
determine if any abnormal contours exist that would
predispose the tooth to an external perforation. As a
rule, the pinhole should be parallel to the adjacent external
surface of the tooth.

The position of a pinhole must not result in the pin
being so close to a vertical wall of tooth structure that

FIG 19-15 Pinhole position. A, Position relative to DEJ.
B, Position relative to external tooth surface.

condensation of amalgam against the pin or wall is jeopardized (Fig. 19-16, A). Therefore it may be necessary to
prepare first a recess in the vertical wall with the No.
245 bur to permit proper pinhole preparation, as well as
to provide a minimum of 0.5 mm clearance around the
circumference of the pin for adequate condensation of
amalgam (see Fig. 19-16, B and C).'1 If necessary, after a
pin is inappropriately placed, the operator should provide clearance around the pin to provide sufficient
space for the smallest condenser nib to ensure that
amalgam can be condensed adequately around the pin.
A No. 169L bur can be used, being careful not to damage, or weaken, the pin.
Pinholes should be prepared on a flat surface that is
perpendicular to the proposed direction of the pinhole.
Otherwise, the drill tip may slip or "crawl," and a
depth-limiting drill (discussed later) cannot prepare the
hole as deeply as intended (Fig. 19-17).
Whenever three or more pinholes are placed, they
should be located at different vertical levels on the
tooth, if possible. This will reduce stresses resulting
from pin placement in the same horizontal plane of the
tooth.
Spacing between pins, or the interpin distance, must be
considered when two or more pinholes are prepared.
The optimal interpin distance depends on the size of pin
to be used. The minimal interpin distance is 3 mm for
the Minikin (0.019 inch [0.48 mm]) pin and 5 mm for the
Minim (0.024 inch [0.61 mm]) pin. Maximal interpin
distance results in lower levels of stress in dentin. 9
Several posterior teeth have anatomic features that
may preclude safe pinhole placement. Fluted and furcal
areas should be avoided .71 Specifically, external perforation may result from pinhole placement (1) over the
prominent mesial concavity of the maxillary first premolar; (2) at the midlingual and midfacial bifurcations
of the mandibular first and second molars; and (3) at the
midfacial, midmesial, and middistal furcations of the
maxillary first and second molars. Pulpal penetration
may result from pin placement at the mesiofacial corner
of the maxillary first molar and the mandibular first
molar.

C H A P T E R 19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 19-16 A, Pin placed too close to vertical wall such that adequate condensation of amalgam
i s jeopardized, B and C, Prepare recessed area in vertical wall of mandibular molar with No. 245
bur to provide adequate space for amalgam condensation around pin.

FIG 19-17 Use of a depth-limiting drill to prepare a pinhole in
surface that is not perpendicular to direction of pinhole will result in a pinhole of inadequate depth.
When possible, the location of pinholes on the distal
surface of mandibular molars and lingual surface of
maxillary molars should be avoided. Obtaining the proper
direction for preparing a pinhole in these locations is
difficult because of the abrupt flaring of the roots just
apical to the cementoenamel junction (CEJ) (Fig. 19-18).
If the pinhole is placed parallel to the external surface of
the tooth crown in these areas, penetration into the pulp
is likely.
When the pinhole locations have been determined, a
No. 1/4 bur is first used to prepare a pilot hole (dimple)
approximately one half the diameter of the bur at each
location (Fig. 19-19). The purpose of this hole is to permit more accurate placement of the twist drill and to

FIG 19-18 Note distal flaring of mandibular molar (A) and
palatal root flaring of maxillary molar (B). Root angulation
should be considered before pinhole placement.
prevent the drill from "crawling" once it has begun to
rotate.
Pinhole preparation. The Kodex drill (a twist drill)
should be used for preparing pinholes (Fig. 19-20). The
drill is made of a high-speed tool steel that is swaged into
an aluminum shank. The aluminum shank, which acts as
a heat absorber, is color coded so that it can be easily
matched with the appropriate pin size (Table 19-2; see
also Table 19-1). The drill shanks for the Minuta and
Minikin pins are tapered to provide a built-in "wobble"

CHAPTER

FIG. 19-19

19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

Prepare pilot hole (dimple) with No.1/4 bur.

A, Two types of Kodex
twist drills: standard (a) and depthl i miting (b). B, Drills enlarged: standard (a) and depth-limiting (b).

FIG 19-20

when placed in a latch-type contra-angle handpiece. This
wobble allows the drill to be "free floating" and thus to
align itself as the pinhole is prepared to minimize dentinal crazing or breakage of the small drills.
Because the optimal depth of the pinhole into the
dentin is 2 mm (only 1.5 mm for the Minikin pin), a
depth-limiting drill should be used to prepare the hole
(see Fig. 19-20). Only when this type of drill prepares a
hole on a flat surface that is perpendicular to the drill
will it prepare the pinhole to the correct depth (see Fig.
19-17). When the location for starting a pinhole is neither flat nor perpendicular to the desired pinhole direction, either flatten the location area or use the standard
twist drill (see Fig. 19-20), whose blades are 4 to 5 mm
in length, to prepare a pinhole that has an effective
depth. To minimize guessing when using the standard
twist drill, the Omni-Depth gauge can be used to measure accurately the pinhole depth (Fig. 19-21).

With the drill in the latch-type contra-angle handpiece, place the drill in the gingival crevice beside the location for the pinhole, position it until it lies flat against
the external surface of the tooth, and then, without
changing the angulation obtained from the crevice position, move the handpiece occlusally and place the drill
in the previously prepared pilot hole (Fig. 19-22, A).
Now, view the drill from a 90-degree angle to the previous viewing position to ascertain that the drill is also
correctly angled in this plane (see Fig. 19-22, B). Incorrect angulation of the drill may result in pulpal exposure or external perforation. Should the proximity of an
adjacent tooth interfere with placement of the drill into
the gingival crevice, place a flat, thin-bladed hand instrument into the crevice and against the external surface of the tooth to indicate the proper angulation for
the drill. With the drill tip in its proper position and
with the handpiece rotating at very low speed (300 to 500

CHAPTER 19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

TMS Link Series and Link Plus Pins

( double shear)
1 mm = 0.03937 in.

FIG . 19-21 Omni-Depth gauge is used to measure depth of
pinhole(s).

FIG 19-22 Determining angulation for twist drill. A, Place drill in gingival crevice, and position
i t flat against tooth. Move it occlusally into position without changing angulation obtained.
B, Repeat A while viewing drill from position 90 degrees left or right of that viewed in A. C and D,
With twist drill at correct angulation, prepare pinhole in one or two thrusts until depth-limiting
portion of drill is reached.

rpm), apply pressure to the drill, and prepare the pinhole in
one or two movements until the depth-limiting portion of the
drill is reached, and remove the drill from the pinhole (see
Fig. 19-22, C and D). Using more than one or two movements, tilting the handpiece during the drilling procedure, or allowing the drill to rotate more than very

briefly at the bottom of the pinhole will result in a pinhole that is too large. Although not usually recommended, a steady stream of air may be applied to the
drill to dissipate heat. The drill should never stop rotating (from insertion to removal from the pinhole) to prevent the drill from breaking while in the pinhole.

CHAPTER 1 9

Complex Amalgam Restorations

Dull drills used to prepare pinholes can cause increased frictional heat and cracks in the dentin. Standlee
et al have demonstrated that a twist drill becomes too
dull for use after cutting 20 pinholes or less, and the signal for discarding the drill is the need for increased
pressure on the handpiece. Using a drill whose selfli miting shank shoulder has become rounded is contraindicated (Fig. 19-23). A worn and rounded shoulder
may not properly limit pinhole depth and permit pins
to be placed too deeply.
Certain clinical locations require extra care in determining pinhole angulation. The distal of mandibular
molars and the lingual of maxillary molars have been
mentioned previously as areas of potential problems because of the abrupt flaring of the roots just apical to the
CEJ (see Fig. 19-18). Mandibular posterior teeth (with
their lingual crown tilt), teeth that are rotated in the
arch, and teeth that are abnormally tilted in the arch deserve careful attention before and during pinhole placement. For mandibular second molars that are severely
tilted mesially, care must be exercised to orient properly
the drill to prevent external perforation on the mesial
surface and pulpal penetration on the distal surface

FIG 19-23 Minikin self-limiting drill with worn shank shoulder (left) compared to a new drill with an unworn shoulder
( right).

F I G . 19-24

(Fig. 19-24). Because of limited interarch space, it is
sometimes difficult to orient correctly the twist drill
when placing pinholes at the distofacial or distolingual
line angles of mandibular second and third molars
(Fig. 19-25).
Pin design. For each of the four sizes of pins, several
designs are available: standard, self-shearing, two-inone, Link Series, and Link Plus (Fig. 19-26). The Link Series and Link Plus pins are recommended. TMS pins are
available in titanium or stainless steel plated with gold.
The Link Series pin is contained in a color-coded
plastic sleeve that fits a latch-type contra-angle handpiece or the specially designed plastic hand wrench (see
Fig. 19-30, D). The pin is somewhat free floating in the
plastic sleeve to allow it to align itself as it is threaded
into the pinhole (Fig. 19-27). When the pin reaches the
bottom of the hole, the top portion of the pin shears off,
leaving a length of pin extending from the dentin. The
plastic sleeve is then discarded. The Minuta, Minikin,
Minim, and Regular pins are available in the Link Series. The Link Series pins are recommended because of
their versatility, self-aligning ability, and retentiveness.
The Link Plus pins are self-shearing and are available
as a single or two-in-one pin contained in a color-coded
plastic sleeve (Fig. 19-28). This design has a sharper
thread, a shoulder stop at 2 mm, and a tapered tip to
more readily fit the bottom of the pinhole as prepared
by the twist drill. It also provides a 2.7-mm length of pin
to extend out of the dentin, which usually needs to be
shortened. Theoretically, and as suggested by Standlee
et albs these innovations should reduce the stress created
in the surrounding dentin as the pin is inserted and reduce the apical stress at the bottom of the pinhole.
Kelsey et al have demonstrated for the two-in-one Link
Plus pin that both the first and second pins seat completely into the pinhole before shearing.

Care must be exercised when preparing pinholes in mesially tilted molars to prevent
external perforation on mesial surface (A) and pulpal penetration on the distal surface (B). Broken line is incorrect angulation of twist drill.

C H A P T E R 19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG 19-25 When limited interarch space exists, care must be
exercised when placing pinholes in molars to prevent external
perforation on distal surface.

FIG

19-26 Five designs of TMS pins. A, Standard. B, Self-shearing. C, Two-in-one. D, Link
Series. E, Link Plus.

FIG . 19-27 Cross-sectional view of Link Series pin.

The standard pin is approximately 7 mm long with a
flattened head to engage the hand wrench or the appropriate handpiece chuck, and is threaded to place until it
reaches the bottom of the pinhole as judged by tactile
sense. One advantage of the standard design pin is that
it can be reversed one-quarter to one-half turn following
insertion to full depth to reduce stress created at the apical end of the pinhole (Fig. 19-29). 31
The self-shearing pin has a total length that varies according to the diameter of the pin (see Table 19-1). It also
consists of a flattened head to engage the hand wrench

FIG .

19-28 Link Plus pin.

or the appropriate handpiece chuck for threading into
the pinhole. When the pin approaches the bottom of the
pinhole, the head of the pin shears off, leaving a length
of pin extending from the dentin.
The two-in-one pin is actually two pins in one, with
each one being shorter than the standard pin. The twoin-one pin is approximately 9.5 mm in length and also
has a flattened head to aid in its insertion. When the pin
reaches the bottom of the pinhole, it shears approximately in half, leaving a length of pin extending from
the dentin with the other half remaining in the hand

CHAPTER

19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG19-29 Stress created by self-threading pin as illustrated in a photoelastic study. A, Pin fully
seated in pinhole. B, Pin reversed one-quarter turn. (Courtesy of Dr. Alan W. Irvin.)

FIG 19-31 Handpiece chucks for (A) TMS regular self-sheari ng and Minikin pins, and (B) TMS Minuta pins.

FIG 19-30 Hand wrenches for TMS pins. A, Regular and
Minikin. B, Minim. C, Minuta. D, Link Series and Link Plus.

wrench or the handpiece chuck. This second pin may
then be positioned in another pinhole and threaded to
place in the same manner as the standard pin. The designs available with each size of pin are shown in Tables
19-1 and 19-2.
All of the pin designs can be inserted with an appropriate hand wrench (Fig. 19-30). A conventional latchtype contra-angle handpiece with the appropriate chuck
(Fig. 19-31) also can be used to insert any of the pins except the standard design. A 10:1 reduction gear contraangle handpiece also is available to insert the pins. It
may aid the pin-insertion technique discussed later.
Selection of a particular pin design (see Tables 19-1
and 19-2) is influenced by the size of the pin being used,
the amount of interarch space available, and operator
preference. The Minuta and Minikin pins are available

only in the self-shearing and Link (also self-shearing)
design. With minimal interarch space, the two-in-one
design is undesirable because of its length. Studies have
shown that the two-in-one pin and the self-shearing pin
may sometimes fail to reach the bottom of the pinhole.' ,'," However, a study by May and Heymann
found that 93% of Link Series and Link Plus two-in-one
pins extended to the optimal depth of 2 mm. Eames and
Solly21 demonstrated no significant difference between
the retention of the self-shearing pin and the standard
design pin. However, Newitter and Schlissel
have
shown that more force is required to dislodge the standard design pin than the self-shearing pin.
Pin insertion. Two instruments for insertion of
threaded pins are available: conventional latch-type
contra-angle handpiece (Fig. 19-32), and TMS hand
wrenches (see Fig. 19-30). Studies conflict as to which
method of pin insertion produces the best results. The
latch-type handpiece is recommended for the insertion of
the Link Series and the Link Plus pins. The hand wrench
is recommended for the insertion of standard pins.
When using the latch-type handpiece, insert a Link
Series or a Link Plus pin into the handpiece and place
the pin in the pinhole. Activate the handpiece at low
speed until the plastic sleeve shears from the pin. Then,
remove the sleeve and discard it. For low-speed handpieces with a low gear, the low gear should be used. Using low gear increases the torque and increases the tac-

CHAPTER 19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG 19-32 Conventional latch-type contra-angle handpiece.

FIG 19-33 A, Use of hand wrench to place pin. B, Thread pin to bottom of pinhole, and then reverse wrench one-quarter to one-half turn. C, Evaluate length of pin extending from dentin.

FIG 19-34 Precautions must be taken if rubber dam is not used. A, Gauze throat shield.
B, Hand wrench with 12 to 15 inches (30 to 38 cm) of dental tape attached.

tile sense of the operator. It also reduces the risk of stripping the threads in the dentin once the pin is in place.
A standard design pin is placed in the appropriate
wrench (Fig. 19-33, A) and slowly threaded clockwise
into the pinhole until a definite resistance is felt when
the pin reaches the bottom of the hole (see Fig. 19-33, B).
The pin should then be rotated one-quarter to one-half
turn counterclockwise to reduce the dentinal stress created by the end of the pin pressing the dentin. 31 Carefully remove the hand wrench from the pin.
If the hand wrench is used without rubber dam isolation, a gauze throat shield must be in place, and a strand
of dental tape approximately 12 to 15 inches (30 to 38
cm) in length should be securely tied to the end of the
wrench (Fig. 19-34). These precautions will prevent the
patient from swallowing or aspirating the hand wrench
should it be dropped accidentally.

Once the pins are placed, evaluate their length (see
Fig. 19-33, C). Any length of pin greater than 2 mm
should be removed. As described before, 2 mm of pin
length into amalgam is optimal. Also, whenever possible, it is desirable to have at least 2 mm thickness of
amalgam occlusal to the end of the pin to prevent unnecessary weakening of the restoration. To remove the
excess length of pin, use a sharp No. 1/a, 1/2, or 169L bur
at high speed and oriented perpendicular to the pin
(Fig. 19-35, A). If oriented otherwise, the rotation of the
bur may loosen the pin by rotating it counterclockwise.
During removal of excess pin length, the assistant may
apply a steady stream of air to the pin and have the
evacuator tip positioned to remove the pin segment.
Also during removal, the pin may be stabilized with a
small hemostat or cotton pliers. After placement, the pin
should be tight, immobile, and not easily withdrawn.

C H A P T E R 19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG 19-35 A, Use sharp No. '/, bur held perpendicular to pin to shorten pin. B and C, Evaluate
preparation to determine need for bending pins.

Using a mirror, view the preparation from all directions (particularly from the occlusal) to determine if any
pins need to be bent to position them within the anticipated contour of the final restoration and to provide adequate bulk of amalgam between the pin and the external surface of the final restoration (see Fig. 19-35, B
and C). Pins are not to be bent to make them parallel or
to increase their retentiveness. However, occasionally,
bending a pin may be necessary to allow for condensation of amalgam occlusogingivally. When pins require
bending, the TMS bending tool (Fig. 19-36, A) must be
used. The bending tool should be placed on the pin
where the pin is to be bent, and with firm controlled

pressure, the bending tool should be rotated until the
desired amount of bend is achieved (see Fig. 19-36, B
through D). Use of the bending tool allows placement of
the fulcrum at some point along the length of the exposed pin. A hand instrument such as an amalgam condenser or Black spoon excavator should not be used to
bend a pin because the location of the fulcrum will be at
the orifice of the pinhole. These hand instruments may
cause crazing or fracture of the dentin, and the abrupt or
sharp bend that usually results, increases the chance of
breaking the pin (Fig. 19-37). Also, the operator has less
control when pressure is applied with a hand instrument, and the chance of slipping is increased.

C H A P T E R 19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG 19-37 A, Do not use Black spoon excavator or other hand instrument to bend pin. B and C,
Use of hand instruments may create sharp bend in pin and fracture dentin.

Cemented pins. Pinholes for cemented pins are prepared to a depth of 3 to 4 mm in dentin using a twist
drill with a diameter of 0.027 inch (0.68 mm) or 0.021
inch (0.53 mm) (Fig. 19-38, A). Threaded stainless steel
wire with a diameter of 0.025 inch (0.64 mm) is used for
the 0.027-inch pinhole and 0.020-inch (0.51 mm) wire for
the 0.021-inch pinhole (see Fig. 19-38, B through F). The
pins are cemented into place with any suitable dental
luting agent using a Lentulo spiral instrument (see Fig.
19-38, G and H).
Possible Problems With Pins
Failure of pin-retained restorations. The failure of
pin-retained restorations might occur at any of five different locations (Fig. 19-39). Failure can occur: (1) within
the restoration (restoration fracture), (2) at the interface
between the pin and the restorative material (pinrestoration separation), (3) within the pin (pin fracture),
(4) at the interface between the pin and the dentin (pindentin separation), and (5) within the dentin (dentin
fracture). Failure is more likely to occur at the pindentin interface than at the pin-restoration interface.
The operator must keep these areas of potential failure
in mind at all times and apply the necessary principles
to minimize the possibility of an inadequate restoration.
Broken drills and broken pins. Occasionally, a twist
drill will break if it is stressed laterally or allowed to
stop rotating before being removed from the pinhole.
Use of sharp twist drills helps eliminate the possibility
of drill breakage. The standard pin usually breaks if
turned more than needed to reach the bottom of the pinhole. Pins also may break during bending, if care is not
exercised. The treatment for both broken drills and

broken pins is to choose an alternate location, at least
1.5 mm remote from the broken item, and prepare another pinhole. Removal of a broken pin or drill is difficult, if not impossible, and usually should not be attempted. The best solution for these two problems is
prevention.
Loose pins. Self-threading pins sometimes do not
properly engage the dentin because the pinhole was inadvertently prepared too large or a self-shearing pin
failed to shear, resulting in stripped-out dentin. The pin
should be removed from the tooth and the pinhole
reprepared with the next largest size drill, and the appropriate pin inserted. Preparing another pinhole of the
same size 1.5 mm from the original pinhole also is
acceptable.
As described earlier, a properly placed pin can be
loosened while being shortened with a bur, if the bur is
not held perpendicularly to the pin and the pin is stabilized. If the pin is loose, remove it from the pinhole by
holding a rotating bur parallel to the pin and lightly
contacting the surface of the pin. This will cause the pin
to rotate counterclockwise out of the pinhole. Try to insert another pin of the same size. If the second pin fails
to engage the dentin tightly, prepare a larger hole, and
insert the appropriate pin. Preparing another pinhole of
the same size 1.5 mm from the original pinhole also is
acceptable.
Penetration into the pulp and perforation of the
external tooth surface. Either penetration into the
pulp or perforation of the external surface of the tooth is
obvious if there is hemorrhage in the pinhole following
removal of the drill. Usually, the operator can tell when

C H A P T E R 19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

a penetration or perforation has occurred by an abrupt
loss of resistance of the drill to hand pressure. Also, if a
standard or Link Series pin continues to thread into the
tooth beyond the 2 mm depth of the pinhole, this is an
indication of a penetration or perforation. A pulpal penetration might be suspected if the patient is anesthetized

FIG .

19-38 Placement of cemented
pins. A, Prepare pinholes with appropriately sized twist drill. B, Cut proper
l ength of pin with wire-cutting pliers.
C, Slightly round the end of the
pin with rotating carborundum disc.
D, Place pins in tooth, and evaluate
need for bending. E, Hold pin with two
pairs of pliers, and bend as necessary. F,
Pins bent. G, Convey cement into pinholes with a Lentulo spiral instrument.
H, Pins cemented.

and has had no sensitivity to tooth preparation until the
pinhole is being completed or the pin is being placed.
However, with profound anesthesia some patients may
not feel pulpal penetration.
Radiographs can verify that a pulpal penetration has
not occurred if the view shows dentin between the pulp
and the pin. A radiograph projecting the pin in the same
region as the pulp does not confirm a pulpal penetration
because the pin and the pulp may be superimposed as a
result of angulation. In contrast, a radiograph showing
a pin projecting outside the tooth confirms external perforation. However, a radiograph showing the pin inside

CHAPTER

the projected outline of the tooth does not exclude the
possibility of an external perforation.
In an asymptomatic tooth, a pulpal penetration is
treated as any other small mechanical exposure. If the
exposure is discovered following preparation of the pinhole, control the hemorrhage, if any. Then, place a calcium hydroxide liner over the opening of the pinhole,
and prepare another hole 1.5 to 2 mm away. If the exposure is discovered as the pin is being placed, remove the
pin and control any hemorrhage. Place a calcium hydroxide liner over the pinhole, and prepare another hole
1.5 to 2 mm away. Although certain studies have shown
that the pulp will tolerate pin penetration when placed
in a relatively sterile environment,'" it is not recommended that pins remain in place when a pulpal penetration has occurred. If the pin were left in the pulp, (1)
the depth of the pin into pulpal tissue would be difficult
to determine, (2) considerable postoperative sensitivity
might ensue, and (3) the pin location might complicate
subsequent endodontic therapy. Regardless of the method
of treatment rendered, the patient must be informed of the perforation or pulpal penetration at the completion of the appointment. The affected tooth should be periodically

evaluated using appropriate radiographs. The patient
should be instructed to inform the dentist if any discomfort develops.
Because most teeth receiving pins have had extensive
restorations and/or caries, the health of the pulp has
probably already been compromised to some extent.
Therefore the ideal treatment of a pulpal penetration for
such a compromised tooth generally is endodontic therapy. Endodontic treatment should be strongly considered when such a tooth is to receive a cast restoration.

19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

An external perforation might be suspected if an
unanesthetized patient senses pain when a pinhole is
being prepared or a pin is being placed in a tooth that
has had endodontic therapy. Observation of the angulation of the twist drill or the pin should indicate
whether a pulpal penetration or external perforation
has occurred.
Perforation of the external surface of the tooth can occur occlusal or apical to the gingival attachment. Careful probing and radiographic examination must accurately diagnose the location of a perforation. The
method of treatment for a perforation often depends on
the experience of the operator and the particular circumstances of the tooth being treated.
Three options are available for perforations that occur
occlusal to the gingival attachment: (1) the pin can be
cut off flush with the tooth surface and no further treatment rendered, (2) the pin can be cut off flush with the
tooth surface and the preparation for a cast restoration
extended gingivally beyond the perforation, or (3) the
pin can be removed, if still present, and the external aspect of the pinhole enlarged slightly and restored with
amalgam. Surgical reflection of the gingival tissue may
be necessary to render adequate treatment. The location
of perforations occlusal to the attachment often determines the option to be pursued.
Two options are available for perforations that occur
apical to the attachment: (1) reflect the tissue surgically,
remove the necessary bone, enlarge the pinhole slightly,
and restore with amalgam, or (2) perform a crownlengthening procedure, and place the margin of a cast
restoration gingival to the perforation (Fig. 19-40). As
with those perforations located occlusal to the gingival
attachment, the gingivoapical location of the perforation and the design of the present or planned restoration
determine which option to pursue. As with pulpal penetration, the patient must be informed of the perforation and
proposed treatment. The prognosis of external perfora-

Dentin

Dentin

FIG 19-39 Five possible locations of failure of pin-retained
restorations. a, Fracture of restorative material; b, Separation
of pin from restorative material; c, Fracture of pin; d, Separation of pin from dentin; e, Fracture of dentin.

tions is favorable when they are recognized early and
treated properly.
Having a thorough knowledge of pulpal and external
anatomy of the teeth and an accurate representation of
the tooth radiographically and following the techniques
described in this chapter can substantially reduce the
occurrence of pulpal penetrations and external perforations during the use of pins.
Finally, all concepts for tooth preparation for amalgam restorations presented in Chapters 16, 17, and 18
should be applied for a pin-retained amalgam restoration. The margins should be evaluated for soundness
and a correct cavosurface angle of 90 degrees (or greater
on the occlusal surface).
Tooth Preparation for Slot-Retained Amalgam
Restorations. Slot length depends on the extent of the

tooth preparation. Slots are usually placed on the facial,
lingual, mesial, and distal aspects of the preparation.

C H A P T E R 19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG
19-40 External perforation of
pin. A, Radiograph showing external
perforation of pin. B, Surgical access
to extruding pin (arrow). C, Pin cut
flush with tooth structure and crownl engthening procedure performed.
D, Length of pin removed.

The slot may be continuous or segmented, depending
on the amount of missing tooth structure and whether
pins were used. McMaster41 has shown that shorter slots
provide as much resistance to horizontal force as do
longer slots.
A No. 33'/2 bur is used to place a slot in the gingival
floor 0.5 mm axial of the DEJ (see Fig. 19-4). The slot is
at least 0.5 mm in depth and 1 mm or more in length,
depending on the distance between the vertical walls.
An alternative technique is to prepare the slot initially
with a No. 169L bur. Then, ensure its convergence by refining it with a No. 331/2 bur. Some operators find that
this alternative technique provides more control because the No. 169L bur is less end-cutting than the No.
33 1/2 bur. Alternatively, slots can be used in combination
with pins to generate additional retention and resistance forms. No pins were used in this illustration.
Tooth Preparation for Amalgam Foundations. The
technique of tooth preparation for a foundation depends on the type of retention that is selected-pin retention; slot retention; or, in the case of endodontically
treated teeth, chamber retention. The techniques have in
common the axial location of the retention. As stated
previously, the retention for a foundation must be sufficiently deep axially so that final preparation for the subsequent indirect restoration does not compromise the
resistance and retention forms of the foundation. The
technique for each type of retention is discussed.
Pin Retention. Severely broken-down teeth with few
or no vertical walls, where an indirect restoration is indicated, may require a pin-retained foundation. The
main difference between the use of pins for foundations
and the use of pins in definitive restorations is the distance of the pinholes from the external surface of the
tooth . 35 For foundations: (1) the pinholes must be located farther from the external surface of the tooth (far-

ther internally from the DEJ), and (2) more bending of
the pins may be necessary to allow for adequate axial reduction of the foundation without exposing the pins
during the cast metal tooth preparation. Any removal of
the restorative material from the circumference of the
pin will compromise its retentive effect. If the material is
removed from more than one half the diameter of the
pin, any retentive effect of the pin has probably been
eliminated.
The location of the pinhole from the external surface
of the tooth for foundations depends on: (1) the occlusogingival location of the pin (external morphology of
the tooth), (2) the type of restoration to be placed (a
porcelain-fused-to-metal or all-ceramic preparation requires more reduction than a full gold crown), and
(3) the type of margin to be prepared. Preparations with
heavily chamfered margins at a normal occlusogingival
location require pin (and slot) placement at a greater axial depth. Proximal retention locks should still be used
wherever possible. The length of the pins also must be
considered to permit adequate occlusal reduction without exposing the pins.
Slot Retention. Slots are placed in the gingival floor
of a preparation with a No. 33 1/2 bur (see Fig. 19-4).
Foundation slots, as with pins, are placed slightly more
axial (farther inside the DEJ) than indicated for conventional amalgam preparations. This more pulpal positioning depends on the type of preparation for a casting
that is planned. The preparation for an indirect restoration should not eliminate or cut into the foundations retentive features. The number of remaining vertical walls
determines the indication for slots. Slots are used to oppose retention locks in vertical walls or to provide retention where no vertical walls remain. Retention locks
are placed in remaining vertical walls with a No. 169L or
1/a bur as illustrated in Fig. 19-6. Slots are generally 0.5 to

C H A P T E R 19

19-41 Chamber retention
with 2- to 4-mm extension of
foundation into canal spaces
FIG

1 mm in depth and the width of the No. 33 1/ bur. Their
length is usually 2 to 4 mm, depending on the distance
between the remaining vertical walls.
Chamber Retention. For developing foundations in
multirooted endodontically treated teeth, an alternative
technique has been described by Nayyar et al . 4s This
technique is recommended only when: (1) dimension to
the pulp chamber is adequate to provide retention and
bulk of amalgam, and (2) dentin thickness in the region
of the pulp chamber is adequate to provide rigidity and
strength to the tooth. Kane et al demonstrated that extension into the root canal space 2 to 4 mm is recommended when the pulp chamber height is 2 mm or less
(Fig. 19-41). When the pulp chamber height is 4 to 6 mm,
no advantage is gained from extension into the root
canal space. 32 After matrix application, amalgam is then
thoroughly condensed into the pulp canals, the pulp
chamber, and the coronal portion of the tooth. Natural
undercuts in the pulp chamber and the divergent canals
provide necessary retention form. Resistance form
against forces that otherwise may cause tooth fracture is
i mproved by gingival extension of the crown preparation approximately 2 mm beyond the foundation onto
sound tooth structure. This extension should have a total taper of opposing walls of less than 10 degrees . 61 If
the pulp chamber height is less than 2 mm, the use of a
prefabricated post, cast post and core, pins, or slots
should be considered. Following placement of the foundation, the tooth may be prepared for the crown or onlay and the indirect restoration completed.
RESTORATIVE TECHNIQUE
Use of Desensitizer or Bonding System. Once the
preparation is completed with the necessary resistance
and retention forms incorporated, clean the preparation, if indicated, with air/water spray and remove visible moisture without desiccating the tooth. Inspect for
detection and removal of any debris or unwanted liner.
As discussed in Chapter 17, to reduce dentin permeability and seal the dentin, either a dentin desensitizer

Complex Amalgam Restorations

or dentin bonding system is used in lieu of varnish.
Dentin bonding systems are usually recommended for
extensive preparations, particularly with deep excavations, capped cusps, and in weak teeth . 6, 69 If a dentin
bonding system is used, care should be exercised to
avoid pooling of the adhesive at the margins of the
preparation and in retentive features such as slots,
grooves, and undercuts. The technique for the use of
dentin bonding systems for amalgam restorations is
discussed in Chapter 17.
In contrast to the advantages of dentin bonding systems suggested by in vitro studies, a recent clinical review of bonded amalgam restorations in place over
5 years reported no difference in number of failures or
marginal deterioration compared with restorations
placed using cavity varnish . 63
Matrix Placement. One of the most difficult steps in
restoring a severely involved posterior tooth is development of a satisfactory matrix. Fulfilling the objectives of
a matrix (as presented in Chapters 13, 16, and 17) is
complicated by the possible gingival extensions, missing line angles, and capped cusps that are typical of
these tooth preparations.
Universal Matrix. The Tofflemire retainer and band
described in Chapter 17 can be used successfully for the
majority of posterior amalgam restorations (Fig. 19-42).
Use of the Tofflemire retainer requires sufficient tooth
structure to retain the band after it is applied.
When the Tofflemire is placed appropriately but an
opening remains next to prepared tooth structure, a
closed system can be developed as illustrated in
Fig. 19-43. Cut a strip of matrix material that is long
enough to extend from the mesial to the distal corners of
the tooth. The strip must extend into these corners sufficiently that the band, when tight, will hold the strip in
position. Also, it must not extend into the proximal
areas or a ledge will result in the restoration contour
when the matrix is removed. Loosen the Tofflemire retainer one-half turn, and insert the strip of matrix material next to the opening, between the matrix band and the
tooth. Tighten the retainer and complete the matrix as
described previously in Chapter 17. Sometimes, it is
helpful to condense a small amount of softened compound between the strip and open aspect of the bandretainer to stabilize and support the strip further (see
Fig. 19-43, G and H).
When very little tooth structure remains and deep
gingival margins are present, the Tofflemire matrix
may not function successfully. In the following sections
the Automatrix system (Dentsply Caulk, Milford,
Delaware) (Figs. 19-44 and 19-45) and the compoundsupported copper band (Fig. 19-46) are presented for
use when minimal tooth structure is available.
Automatrix. The Automatrix (see Fig. 19-44) is a retainerless matrix system designed for any tooth regardless of its circumference and height. The Automatrix

CHAPTER

19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG 19-42 A, Mandibular first molar with fractured distolingual cusp. B, Insert wedges. C, Initial tooth preparation. D and E, Excavate any infected dentin; if indicated, remove any remaini ng old restorative materials. F, Apply liner and base (if necessary). G, Prepare pilot holes.
H, Align twist drill with external surface of tooth. I, Prepare pinholes. J, Insert Link pins with
slow-speed handpiece. K, Note depth-limiting shoulder (arrow) of inserted Link Plus pin. L, Use
No. '/, bur to shorten pins.

bands are supplied in three widths: 3/16, 1/4, and 5/16 inch
(4.8, 6.35, and 7.79 mm). The medium band is available
in two thicknesses (0.0015 and 0.002 inch [0.038 and 0.05
mm]). The 3/16 and 5/16 -inch band widths are available in
the 0.002-inch thickness only. Advantages of this system
include: (1) convenience, (2) improved visibility because

of absence of a retainer, (3) ability to place the autolock
loop on the facial or lingual surface of the tooth, and (4)
decreased time for application as compared to the copper band matrix. Disadvantages of this system are that:
(1) the band is flat and difficult to burnish and is sometimes unstable even when wedges are in place, and (2)

CHAPTER

19 Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG 19-42, cont'd M, Bend pins (if necessary) with bending tool. N, Final tooth preparation. O,
Tofflemire retainer and matrix band applied to prepared tooth. P, Reflect light to evaluate proxi mal area of matrix band. O, Preparation overfilled. R, Restoration carved. S, Reflect light to evaluate adequacy of proximal contact and contour. T, Restoration polished.

development of proper proximal contours and contacts
can be difficult with the Automatrix bands. Use of the
Automatrix system is illustrated in Fig. 19-45.
Compound-Supported Copper Band Matrix. The
compound-supported copper band matrix also may be
used when the Tofflemire matrix cannot be used successfully. Fabrication of the copper band matrix can be
ti me consuming, but when done properly satisfies the
requirements of a good matrix. Fig. 19-46 illustrates the
fabrication of a compound-supported copper band matrix. A seamless, annealed copper band is used for the
matrix. (Heating the band red-hot and then immediately immersing it in water can anneal the band.)
Select the smallest copper band that will fit over the
circumference of the tooth, but still touch or nearly
touch the proximal surfaces of the adjacent teeth. Before
trying a band on the tooth, festoon the gingival end with
curved crown and bridge scissors to correspond to the

level of the gingiva. Then, smooth any rough edges with
a sandpaper disc or mounted rubber wheel, and contour the cut end with No. 114 contouring pliers (see Fig.
19-46, B through F). Slightly withdraw the wedges placed
during preparation of the tooth. This will allow teasing
the band between the wedges and gingival margin.
Continue to try-in the band and adjust the gingival
end until the band extends approximately 1 mm past
the gingival margins. No. 114 contouring pliers can be
used to develop some contour to the proximal, facial,
and lingual aspects of the band and to improve its gingival adaptation. With the band in place on the tooth,
use a sharp explorer to scribe a line around the outer
surface of the band to indicate the correct occlusal
height (see Fig. 19-46, G). This line should be 1 to 2 mm
above the marginal ridges of adjacent teeth and should
provide adequate occlusal height on the facial and lingual surfaces to allow for restoration of reduced cusps.

CHAPTER

19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG 19-43 Technique for closing open space of Tofflemire matrix system. A, Tooth preparation
with wedges in place. B, Open aspect of matrix band next to prepared tooth structure. C and D,
Cut appropriate length of matrix material. E, Insert strip of matrix material. F, Closed matrix system. G and H, Place compound between strip and matrix band, and contour if necessary. 1,
Restoration carved.

Remove the band, cut it with scissors along the scribed
line, and smooth any rough edges with a sandpaper
disc or mounted rubber wheel (see Fig. 19-46, H and I).
To help ensure adequate proximal contact with the adj acent teeth, reduce the thickness of the band (but do not
penetrate) by relieving the outer surface in the area of
each proximal contact area using a rotating sandpaper
disc or suitable mounted stone (see Fig. 19-46, J). Replace the band, and reinsert the wedges.
To further adapt the band to the tooth, crimp the facial
surface in the gingival one third using No. 110 pliers (see
Fig. 19-46, L and M). Evaluate proximal contacts and
contour, making adjustments if indicated. Apply compound to stabilize the band and improve its adaptation
to the tooth in the gingival aspect of the facial and lingual surfaces (see Fig. 19-46, N, and Chapter 17). Again,
evaluate the matrix for adequate adaptation and con-

tour, and make corrections where indicated. Routinely
burnish the preparation side of the matrix with a
warmed, suitably shaped burnisher in the contact areas
to ensure that no compound is between the band and the
adjacent teeth (at the contacts). Assess tactilely that the
band is touching the adjacent teeth (see Fig. 19-46, O).
Regardless of the type of matrix system used, the matrix
must be stable. If the matrix for a complex amalgam

restoration is not stable during condensation, a homogeneous restoration may not be developed. The restoration may be improperly condensed, weak, and may disintegrate when the matrix is removed, even if pins are
used for retention. In addition to providing stability,
the matrix should extend beyond the gingival margins
of the preparation enough to provide support for the
matrix and to permit appropriate wedge stabilization.
As a rule, the matrix should extend occlusally beyond the

C H A P T E R 19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 19-44 A, Automatrix retainerless
matrix system. B, Automatrix band.
C, Automate II tightening device.
D, Shielded nippers. (A, Courtesy of
L.D. Caulk Company, Milford, Delaware.)

marginal ridge of the adjacent tooth or teeth by 1 to 2 mm.
Matrix stability during condensation is especially important
for slot-retained amalgam restorations. If the matrix is not
secure during condensation, it may slip out of position
causing loss of the restoration. Assuming matrix stability, studies have shown that the retention provided by
slots and by self-threading pins is comparable .
Therefore clinical experience will determine whether
the slot-retained amalgam is more appropriate than the
pin-retained amalgam.

I nserting the Amalgam. A high-copper alloy is
strongly recommended for the complex amalgam
restoration because of excellent clinical performance 37,51
and high early compressive strengths . Spherical alloys
have a higher early strength than the admixed alloys,
and spherical alloys can be condensed quicker with less
pressure to ensure good adaptation around the pins.
However, proximal contacts may be easier to achieve
with admixed alloys because of their condensability,
and their extended working time may allow more ade-

CHAPTER 19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG.

19-45 Application of Automatrix for developing pin-retained "amalgam crown" on
mandibular first molar. A, Tooth preparation with wedges in place. B, Enlarge circumference of
band if necessary. C, Burnish band with egg-shaped burnisher. D through F, Place band around
tooth, tighten with Automate II tightening device, and set wedges firmly to place. G, Apply green
compound. H, Contour band with back of warm Black spoon excavator. I, Overfill preparation,
and carve the occlusal aspect.

quate time for condensation, removal of the matrix
band, and final carving. Because the complex amalgam
restorations usually are very large, a slow or medium
set amalgam may be selected to provide more time for
the carving and adjustment of the restoration.
If the amalgam is to be bonded, the insertion of the
amalgam must coincide with the placement of the bonding adhesive, as described in earlier chapters. Triturate
a mix of amalgam according to the manufacturer's directions and with the amalgam carrier, transfer some of
the amalgam to the gingival portion of the preparation.
For very large restorations, some operators insert the
entire triturated amalgam mass into the preparation.
Using appropriately sized condensers, condense each
increment of amalgam. Regardless of the insertion technique, care must be taken to condense the amalgam
thoroughly in and around the retentive features of the
preparation, such as slots, grooves and pins. If a mix of

amalgam becomes dry or crumbly, immediately triturate a new mix. Using only properly mixed amalgam
can minimize layering, which weakens the restoration.
Continue condensation until the preparation is overfilled.
With a complex (or any large) amalgam, carving time
must be properly allocated. The operator must not
spend too much time on occlusal carving without allowing adequate time for carving the more inaccessible
gingival margins and proximal and axial contours. First,
remove the bulk of excess amalgam on the occlusal surface and grossly develop the anatomy, especially the
marginal ridge heights with a discoid carver. Then, define the occlusal embrasures running the tine of an explorer against the internal aspect of the matrix band.
Accurately developed marginal ridge heights and embrasures reduce the potential of fracturing the marginal
ridge(s) when the matrix is removed.

CHAPTER 19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG . 19-45, cont'd J and K, Use shielded nippers to cut autolock loop. L, Separate band with
explorer. M, Remove band in oblique direction (facially with some occlusal vector). N, Restoration carved. O, Restoration polished.

Matrix removal is critical when placing complex amalgam
restorations. Matrix removal is especially critical for
slot-retained restorations.-" If the matrix is removed
prematurely, there is risk of amalgam fracture causing
loss of the restoration. After condensation of the amalgam and initial carving of the occlusal aspect of the
restoration (see Fig. 19-46, P), break away any compound (if used) with an explorer or Black spoon excavator. Tofflemire-retained matrices are removed first by
loosening and removing the retainer, and then removing the matrix band with laterally oriented, short-range
movements, as described later. Do not attempt to remove any matrix vertically because this will apply dislodging forces on the recently placed restoration. Automatrix bands are removed by using the system's
instruments and, once the band is open, by the same
technique described for the Tofflemire-retained matrices. To remove a copper band, carefully cut a groove
occlusogingivally on the facial and lingual surfaces of
the band with a No. 2 bur (see Fig. 19-46, Q). Tear the
band apart along these grooves with an explorer, and
remove the two sections in an oblique direction occlusolingually or occlusofacially (see Figs. 19-45, M, and
19-46, R). Complete the carving of the restoration (see
Figs. 19-42, R, 19-45, N, and 19-46, S).
With the wedges still in place to maintain passive
pressure on the band from the adjacent tooth, remove
the Tofflemire retainer from the band, if one is being
used. Leaving the wedges in place may help prevent
fracturing the marginal ridge amalgam, even though
some operators prefer to remove the wedges before ma-

trix removal. Then, remove each end of the band by
sliding it in an oblique direction (i.e., move the band facially or lingually while simultaneously moving it in an
occlusal direction). Moving the band obliquely toward
the occlusal surface minimizes the possibility of fracturing the marginal ridge. Preferably, the matrix band
should be removed in the same direction as wedge
placement to prevent dislodging the wedges. Next, remove the wedges and with an amalgam knife or an explorer remove any interproximal gingival excess. Develop facial and lingual contours with a Hollenback
carver, amalgam knife, or an explorer to complete the
carving (see Fig. 19-42, R and S). Remember that rotary
instruments can be used to complete the occlusal carving if the amalgam has set to a hardness such that the
force needed to carve with hand instruments might
fracture portions of the restoration. Appropriate round
and flame-shaped burs can be used to develop occlusal
anatomy.
Evaluate the margins with an explorer and correct
any discrepancy. Evaluate the adequacy of each proximal contact by using a mirror occlusally and lingually to
ensure that no light can be reflected between the restoration and the adjacent tooth at the level of the proximal
contact (see Fig. 19-42, S). When the proper proximal
contour and/or contact cannot be achieved in the large,
complex restoration, it may be possible to prepare a conservative two-surface tooth preparation within the initial amalgam to restore the proper proximal surface. The
amalgam forming the walls of this "ideal" preparation
must have sufficient bulk to prevent future fracture.

C H A P T E R 19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG
19-46 Compound-supported copper band matrix for developing pin-retained "amalgam
crown" on maxillary first molar. A, Tooth preparation with wedges in place. B, Festoon gingival
end of band with curved crown and bridge scissors. C, Festooned band. D, Smooth any rough
edges with rotating sandpaper disc. E, Contour gingival end of band with No. 114 contouring
pliers. F, Contoured band. G, With band in place, use explorer to scribe a line around band at
correct occlusal height. H and I, Remove band, trim at scribed line, and smooth any rough edges
with rotating sandpaper disc. J, Thin the proximal contact areas with green stone. K, Place band
around tooth, and set wedges firmly in place.

Remove the rubber dam and evaluate the occlusal
contacts. Adjust the restoration as needed to maintain
harmony with the remaining teeth. The procedure for
obtaining desired occlusal contacts has been described
in earlier chapters. Thin, unwaxed dental floss may be
passed through the proximal contacts one time to help
smooth the amalgam proximal surface and to remove

any amalgam shavings on the proximal surface of the
restoration. This should be accomplished by wrapping
the floss around the proximal of the adjacent tooth
when inserting the floss, thus reducing the force applied
to the condensed amalgam. Once the floss is in the gingival embrasure, wrap it around the condensed amalgam and carefully move it occlusogingivally and facio-

CHAPTER

19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

FIG 19-46, cont'd L and M, On facial surface use No. 110 pliers to crimp gingival aspect of
band to further adapt it to tooth. N, Apply green compound. O, Contour band with back of warm
Black spoon excavator. P, Overfill preparation, and carve occlusal aspect. Q, Break away compound, and section band occlusogingivally on facial and lingual surfaces. R, Remove sections
i n oblique direction (facially with some occlusal vector). S, Restoration carved. T, Restoration
polished.

lingually to smooth the proximal amalgam surface
while checking for amalgam excess. Passing the floss
through a contact more than once may weaken a contact. The shavings should be removed to reduce the possibility of a rough proximal surface or embedment in the
gingival sulcus. Caution the patient not to apply biting
forces to the restoration for several hours.
When an amalgam foundation is being placed, if a
fast-setting high-copper amalgam is used, the final
crown or onlay preparation can be initiated within 30 to
45 minutes of insertion of the foundation. Composite or
silver cermets might be the material of choice when an
adequate matrix cannot be adapted to the tooth in the
gingival aspect, such as a furcation area, assuming the
area can be isolated from oral fluids. Note that oral fluids will interfere with the bonding of any material to
tooth structure and with the setting of silver cermets. As

with amalgam, mechanical retention in addition to
bonding may be necessary for composite foundations
(see Chapter 13).
Contouring and Finishing the Amalgam. Finish and
polish the amalgam restoration, if desired, according to
procedures described in Chapters 16 and 17 (see Figs.
19-42, T, 19-45, O, and 19-46, T).
SUMMARY
Because of its history, the complex amalgam restoration
may be the most frequently placed complex restoration.
However, because of the increasing benefits of composites, the many types of auxiliary retention forms available, and the variations of tooth preparation required
for complex restorations, the operator should be familiar with all of these techniques if he or she is to use these
restorations on a regular basis.

CHAPTER

19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

REFERENCES
1. Abraham G, Baum L: Intentional implantation of pins into
the dental pulp, J South Cal Dent Assoc 40(10):914-920, 1972.
2. Bailey JH: Retention design for amalgam restorations: pins
versus slots, J Prosthet Dent 65(1):71-74, 1991.
3. Barkmeier WW, Cooley RL: Self-shearing retentive pins: a
laboratory evaluation of pin channel penetration before
shearing, JAm Dent Assoc 99(3):476-479, 1979.
4. Barkmeier WW, Frost DE, Cooley RL: The two-in-one, selfthreading, self-shearing pin: efficacy of insertion technique,
J Am Dent Assoc 97(l):51-53,1978.
5. Boyde A, Lester KS: Scanning electron microscopy of selfthreading pins in dentin, Oper Dent 4(2):56-62, 1979.
6. Browning WD, Johnson WW, Gregory PN: Clinical performance of bonded amalgam restorations at 42 months, J Am
Dent Assoc 131(5):607-611, 2000.
7. Burgess JO: Horizontal pins: a study of tooth reinforcement,
J Prosthet Dent 53(3):317-322, 1985.
8. Caputo AA, Standlee JP: Pins and posts-why, when, and
how, Dent Clin North Am 20(2):299-311, 1976.
9. Caputo AA, Standlee JP, Collard EW: The mechanics of load
transfer by retentive pins, J Prosthet Dent 29(4):442-449,
1973.
10. Cecconi BT, Asgar K: Pins in amalgam: a study of reinforcement, J Prosthet Dent 26(2):159-169, 1971.
11. Courtade GL, Timmermans JJ, editors: Pins in restorative dentistry, St Louis, 1971, Mosby.
12. Dilts WE, CouryTL: Conservative approach to the placement
of retentive pins, Dent Clin North Am 20(2):397-402, 1976.
13. Dilts WE, Duncanson MG Jr, Collard EW et al: Retention of
self-threading pins, J Canad Dent Assoc 47(2):119-120, 1981.
14. Dilts WE, Mullaney TP: Relationship of pinhole location and
tooth morphology in pin-retained silver amalgam restorations, J Am Dent Assoc 76(5):1011-1015, 1968.
15. Dilts WE, Welk DA, Laswell HR et al: Crazing of tooth structure associated with placement of pins for amalgam restorations, J Am Dent Assoc 81(2):387-391, 1970.
16. Dilts WE, Welk DA, Stovall J: Retentive properties of pin materials in pin-retained silver amalgam restorations, J Am Dent
Assoc 77(5):1085-1089,1968.
17. Dolph R: Intentional implanting of pins into the dental pulp,
Dent Clin North Am 14(1):73-80, 1970.
18. Durkowski JS et al: Effect of diameters of self-threading pins
and channel locations on enamel crazing, Oper Dent 7(3):8691,1982.
19. Eakle WS, Staninec M: Restorative study of bonded amalgam
restorations (abstract no. 2717), J Dent Res 78(special issue):445, 1999.
20. Eames WB, MacNamara JF: Eight high copper amalgam alloys and six conventional alloys compared, Oper Dent 1(3):98107,1976.
21. Eames WB, Solly MJ: Five threaded pins compared for insertion and retention, Oper Dent 5: 66-71, 1980.
22. Felton DA et al: Pulpal response to threaded pin and retentive slot techniques: a pilot investigation, J Prosthet Dent
66(5):597-602, 1991.
23. Fischer GM, Stewart GP, Panelli J: Amalgam retention using
pins, boxes, and Amalgambond, Am J Dent 6(4):173-175,
1993.
24. Garman TA et al: Self-threading pin penetration into dentin,
J Prosthet Dent 43(3):298-302, 1980.
25. Garman TA et al: A clinical comparison of dentinal slot retention with metallic pin retention, J Am Dent Assoc
107(5):762-763, 1983.

26. Going RE: Pin-retained amalgam, J Am Dent Assoc 73(3):619624,1966.
27. Going RE et al: The strength of dental amalgam as influenced
by pins, J Am Dent Assoc 77(6):1331-1334, 1968.
28. Goldstein PM: Retention pins are friction-locked without use
of cement, J Am Dent Assoc 73(5):1103-1106, 1966.
29. Gourley JV: Favorable locations for pins in molars, Oper Dent
5(l):2-6,1980.
30. Hembree JH: Dentinal retention of pin-retained devices, Gen
Dent 29(5):420-422, 1981.
31. Irvin AW et al: Photoelastic analysis of stress induced from
insertion of self-threading retentive pins, J Prosthet Dent
53(3):311-316,1985.
32. Kane JJ, Burgess JO, Summitt JB: Fracture resistance of amalgam coronal-radicular restorations, J Prosthet Dent 63(6):607613,1990.
33. Kelsey WP III, Blankenau RJ, Cavel WT: Depth of seating of
pins of the Link Series and Link Plus Series, Oper Dent
8(l):18-22,1983.
34. Khera SC, Chan KC, Rittman BR: Dentinal crazing and interpin distance, J Prosthet Dent 40(5):538-543, 1978.
35. Lambert RL, Goldfogel MH: Pin amalgam restoration and
pin amalgam foundation, J Prosthet Dent 54(1):10-2, 1985.
36. Lambert RL, Robinson FB, Lindemuth JS: Coronal reinforcement with cross-splinted pin-amalgam restorations, J Prosthet Dent 54(3):346-349, 1985.
37. Leinfelder KF: Clinical performance of amalgams with high
content of copper, Gen Dent 29(1):52-55, 1981.
38. Markley MR: Pin reinforcement and retention of amalgam
foundations and restorations, J Am Dent Assoc 56(5):675-679,
1958.
39. Martin JA, Bader JD: Five-year treatment outcomes for teeth
with large amalgams and crowns, Oper Dent 22(2):72-78,
1997.
40. May KN, Heymann HO: Depth of penetration of Link Series
and Link Plus pins, Gen Dent 34(5):359-361,1986.
41. McMaster DR et al: The effect of slot preparation length on
the horizontal strength of slot-retained restorations, JProsthet
Dent 67(4):472-477,1992.
42. Moffa JP, Razzano MR, Doyle MG: Pins-a comparison of
their retentive properties, J Am Dent Assoc 78(3):529-535,
1969.
43. Moffa JP, Razzano MR, Folio J: Influence of cavity varnish on
microleakage and retention of various pin-retaining devices,
JProsthet Dent 20(6):541-551, 1968.
44. Mondelli RF, Barbosa WF, Mondelli J et al: Fracture strength
of weakened human premolars restored with amalgam with
and without cusp coverage, Am J Dent 11(4):181-184, 1998.
45. Mondelli J, Ishikiriama A, Pereira JC et al: Cross-splinting a
weakened tooth with a horizontal pin: a new method, J Prosthet Dent 57(4):442-445, 1987.
46. Mondelli J, Vieira DF: The strength of Class 11 amalgam
restorations with and without pins, JProsthet Dent 28(2):179188,1972.
47. Mozer JE, Watson RW: The pin-retained amalgam, Oper Dent
4(4):149-155,1979.
48. Nayyar A, Walton RE, Leonard LA: An amalgam coronalradicular dowel and core technique for endodontically
treated posterior teeth, JProsthet Dent 43(5):511-515, 1980.
49. Newitter DA, Schlissel ER: Evaluation of four instruments for
inserting self-threading pins, Oper Dent 5(4):142-145, 1980.
50. Oliveira F de C, Denehy GE, Boyer DB: Fracture resistance of
endodontically prepared teeth using various restorative materials, J Am Dent Assoc 115(1):57-60, 1987.

CHAPTER

51. Osborne JW, Binon PP, Gale EN: Dental amalgam: clinical
behavior up to eight years, Oper Dent 5(4):24-25, 1980.
52. Outhwaite WC, Garman TA, Pashley DH: Pin vs. slot retention in extensive amalgam restorations, J Prosthet Dent
41(4):396-400, 1979.
53. Outhwaite WC et al: Slots vs. pins: a comparison of retention
under simulated chewing stresses, J Dent Res 61(2):400-402,
1982.
54. Pameijer CH, Stallard RE: Effect of self-threading pins, J Am
Dent Assoc 85(4):895-899, 1972.
55. Pashley EL et al: Amalgam buildups: shear strength and
dentin sealing properties, Oper Dent 16(3):82-89, 1991.
56. Perez E, Schoeneck G,Yanahara H: The adaptation of noncemented pins, JProsthet Dent 26(6):631-639, 1971.
57. Plasmans PJ, Reukers EA: Esthetic veneering of amalgam
restorations with composite resins-combining the best of
both worlds?, Oper Dent 18(2):66-71, 1993.
58. Robbins Jw, Burgess JO, Summitt JB: Retention and resistance features for complex amalgam restorations, J Am Dent
Assoc 118(4):437-442, 1989.
59. Robbins Jw, Summitt JB: Longevity of complex amalgam
restorations, Oper Dent 13(2):54-57, 1988.
60. Setcos JC, Staninec M, Wilson NH: The development of
resin-bonding for amalgam restorations, Brit Dent J
186(7):328-332, 1999.
61. Shillingburg HT Jr, editor: Fundamentals offixed prosthodontics,
ed 3, Chicago, 1997, Quintessence.
62. Smales RJ: Longevity of cusp-covered amalgams: survivals
after 15 years, Oper Dent 16(1):17-20, 1991.
63. Smales RJ, Wetherell JD: Review of bonded amalgam restorations, and assessment in a general practice over five years,
Oper Dent 25(5):374-381, 2000.

19

Complex Amalgam Restorations

64. Smith CT, Schuman N: Restoration of endodontically treated
teeth: a guide for the restorative dentist, Quintessence Int
28(7):457-462, 1997.
65. Standlee JP, Caputo AA, Collard EW: Retentive pin installation stresses, Dent Pract Dent Rec 21(12):417-422, 1971.
66. Standlee JP, Caputo AA, Collard EW et al: Analysis of stress
distribution by endodontic posts, Oral Surg 33(6):952-960,
1972.
67. Standlee JP, Collard EW, Caputo AA: Dentinal defects caused
by some twist drills and retentive pins, J Prosthet Dent
24(2):185-192, 1970.
68. Trabert KC, Caputo AA, Collard EW et al: Stress transfer to
the dental pulp by retentive pins, J Prosthet Dent 30(5):808815,1973.
69. Uyehara MY, Davis RD, Overton JD: Cuspal reinforcement in
endodontically treated molars, Oper Dent 24(6):364-370,
1999.
70. Vitsentzos SI: Study of the retention of pins, J Prosthet Dent
60(4):447-451, 1988.
71. Wacker DR, Baum L: Retentive pins: their use and misuse,
Dent Clin North Am 29(2):327-340, 1985.
72. Webb EL, Straka WF, Phillips CL: Tooth crazing associated
with threaded pins: a three-dimensional model, J Prosthet
Dent 61(5):624-628, 1989.
73. Welk DA, Dilts WE: Influence of pins on the compressive and
horizontal strength of dental amalgam and retention of pins
in amalgam, J Am Dent Assoc 78(1):101-104, 1969.
74. Wing G: Pin retention amalgam restorations, Aust Dent J
10(l):6-10,1965.

I.

II.

I ntroduction, 801
A. Material qualities, 801
B. Indications, 801
1. Large restorations, 801
2. Endodontically treated teeth, 801
3. Teeth at risk for fracture, 801
4. Dental rehabilitation with cast metal
alloys, 801
5. Diastema closure and occlusal plane
correction, 801
6. Removable prosthodontic abutment, 801
C. Contraindications, 801
1. High caries rate, 801
2. Young patients, 802
3. Esthetics, 802
4. Small restorations, 802
D. Advantages, 802
1. Strength, 802
2. Biocompatibility, 802
3. Low wear, 802
4. Control of contours and contacts, 802
E. Disadvantages, 802
1. Number of appointments and higher chair
ti me, 802
2. Temporary, 802
3. Cost, 802
4. Technique sensitive, 802
5. Splitting forces, 802
F. I nitial procedures, 802
1. Occlusion, 802
2. Anesthesia, 802
3. Considerations for temporary
restorations, 802
Tooth preparation for Class II cast metal
restorations, 803
A. Tooth preparation for Class II cast metal
i nlays, 803
1. Initial preparation, 803
2. Final preparation, 808
3. Modifications in inlay tooth preparations, 816
B. Tooth preparation for cast metal onlays, 826
1. Initial preparation, 826
2. Final preparation, 829
3. Modifications in onlay tooth preparations, 829

III.

I V.

Restorative techniques for cast metal restorations, 837
A. Interocclusal records, 837
B. Temporary restoration, 837
1. Technique for indirect temporary, 838
2. Technique for direct temporary, 841
C. Final impression, 843
1. Tissue retraction, 843
2. Polyvinyl siloxane impression, 845
D. Working casts and dies, 846
1. Pouring the final impression, 847
2. Completing the working cast, 847
3. Use of the interocclusal records, 851
E. Wax patterns, 853
1. Forming the pattern base, 853
2. Forming the proximal contour and
contact, 853
3. Forming the occlusal surface, 854
4. Finishing the wax pattern, 855
5. Initially withdrawing and reseating the wax
pattern, 856
F. Spruing, investing, and casting, 856
G. Seating, adjusting, and polishing the
casting, 856
H. Trying-in the casting, 858
1. Preparing the mouth, 858
2. Seating the casting and adjusting proximal
contacts, 860
3. Occluding the casting, 862
4. Improving marginal adaptation, 863
5. Removing the casting, 866
I. Cementation, 866
1. Cement selection, 866
2. Cementation technique, 866
J. Repair, 866
Summary, 867

CHAPTER

I NTRODUCTION
The cast metal restoration is versatile and is especially applicable to Class II onlay preparations. To be satisfactory, the restoration procedure requires meticulous care
both in preparation and in proper manipulation of dental materials, and the dentist and the laboratory technician must be devoted to perfection. The high degree of
satisfaction and service derived from a properly made
cast metal restoration is a reward for the painstaking application required.
The Class II inlay involves the occlusal and proximal
surfaces of a posterior tooth and may cap one or more,
but not all of the cusps. The Class II onlay involves the
proximal surfaces of a posterior tooth, and caps all of
the cusps.
The procedure requires two appointments: the first
for preparing the tooth and making an impression, and
the second for delivering the restoration to the patient.
The fabrication process is referred to as an indirect procedure because the casting is made on a replica of the prepared tooth in a dental laboratory.

MATERIAL QUALITIES
Cast metal restorations can be made from a variety of
casting alloys. Although the physical properties of these
alloys vary, their major advantages are high compressive and tensile strengths. These high strengths are especially valuable in restorations that rebuild most or the
entire occlusal surface.
The American Dental Association (ADA) Specification No. 5 for Inlay Casting Gold requires a minimum
total gold-plus-platinum-metals-content of 75 weight
percent. Such traditional high-gold alloys are quite unreactive in the oral environment and are some of the
most biocompatible materials available to the restorative dentist.
At the present time, four distinct groups of alloys are in
use for cast restorations: the traditional high-gold alloys,
low-gold alloys, palladium-silver alloys, and base metal
alloys. Each of the alternatives to high-gold alloys has required some modification of technique or acceptance of
reduced performance, most commonly in regard to decreased tarnish resistance and decreased burnishability. 13
Also, they have been associated with higher incidences
of postrestorative allergy, most often demonstrated by irritated soft tissues adjacent to the restoration."

I NDICATIONS
Large Restorations. The cast metal inlay is an alternative to amalgam or composite when the higher
strength of a casting alloy is needed or when the superior
control of contours and contacts that the indirect procedure
provides is desired. The cast metal onlay is often an excellent alternative to a crown for teeth that have been
greatly weakened by caries or by large, failing restora-

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

tion(s), but the facial and lingual tooth surfaces are relatively unaffected by disease or injury. For such weakened teeth, the superior physical properties of a casting
alloy are desirable to withstand occlusal loads placed on
the restoration; also, the onlay can be designed to distribute occlusal loads over the tooth in a manner that decreases the chance of tooth fracture in the future. Moreover, preserving intact facial and lingual enamel (or
cementum) is conducive to maintaining the health of contiguous soft tissues.

When proximal surface caries is extensive, favorable
consideration should be given to the cast inlay or onlay
The indirect procedure used to develop the cast restoration allows more control of contours and contacts (both
proximal and occlusal).
Endodontically Treated Teeth. A molar or premolar
with endodontic treatment can be restored with a cast
metal onlay providing the onlay has been thoughtfully
designed to strengthen the remaining tooth.
Teeth at Risk for Fracture. Fracture lines in enamel
and dentin, especially in teeth having extensive restorations, should be recognized as cleavage planes for possible future fracture of the tooth. Restoring these teeth
with a restoration that braces the tooth against fracture
injury may sometimes be warranted. Such restorations
are cast onlays (with skirting) and crowns.
Dental Rehabilitation with Cast Metal Alloys.

When cast metal restorations have been used to restore
adjacent or opposing teeth, the continued use of the
same material may be considered to eliminate electrical
and corrosive activity that sometimes occurs between
dissimilar metals in the mouth, particularly when they
contact each other.
Diastema Closure and Occlusal Plane Correction.

Often the cast inlay or onlay is indicated when extension of the mesiodistal dimension of the tooth is necessary to form a contact with an adjacent tooth. Cast onlays also can be used to correct the occlusal plane of a
slightly tilted tooth.
Removable Prosthodontic Abutment. Teeth that are
to serve as abutments for a removable partial denture
can be restored with a cast metal restoration. The major
advantages of a cast restoration are: (1) the superior
physical properties of the cast metal alloy allow it to better withstand the forces imparted by the partial denture,
and (2) the rest seats, guiding planes, and other aspects
of contour relating to the partial denture are better controlled when the indirect technique is used.

CONTRAINDICATIONS
High Caries Rate. Facial and lingual (especially lingual) smooth-surface caries is indicative of a high caries
activity that should be brought under control before expensive cast metal restorations are used. If caries or previous restorations are present on the facial and lingual

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

surfaces in addition to the occlusal and proximal surfaces, full crown restorations are usually indicated to restore all the lesions with one casting.
Young Patients. With younger patients amalgam or
composite is usually the restorative material of choice
for Class I and Class 11 restorations unless the tooth is
severely broken down or endodontically treated. Often
younger patients will neglect oral hygiene, which may
result in additional caries.
Esthetics. The dentist must consider the esthetic impact (display of metal) of the cast metal restoration. This
factor often limits the use of cast metal restorations to
tooth surfaces that are not visible at a conversational
distance. Composite and porcelain restorations are alternatives in esthetically sensitive areas.
Small Restorations. Because of the success of both
amalgam and composite, few cast metal inlays are done
in small Class I and II restorations.
ADVANTAGES
Strength. The inherent strength of dental casting alloys allows them to restore large damaged or missing
areas and be used in ways that protect the tooth from future fracture injury. Such restorations include onlays
and crowns.
Biocompatibility. As previously mentioned, high
gold dental casting alloys are quite unreactive in the
oral environment. This can be helpful for many patients
who have allergies or sensitivities to other restorative
materials.
Low Wear. Although individual casting alloys vary in
their wear resistance, castings are able to withstand occlusal loads with minimal changes. This is especially
important in large restorations that restore a large percentage of occlusal contacts.
Control of Contours and Contacts. Through the use
of the indirect technique, the dentist has great control
over contours and contacts. This becomes especially important when the restoration is larger and more complex.
DISADVANTAGES
Number of Appointments and Higher Chair Time.

The cast inlay or onlay requires at least two appointments and much more time than a direct restoration,
such as amalgam or composite.
Temporary. Patients must have temporary restorations between the preparation and delivery appointments. Temporaries occasionally loosen and or break,
requiring additional visits.
Cost. In some instances, cost to the patient becomes a
major consideration in the decision to restore teeth with
cast metal restorations. The cost of materials, laboratory
bills, and the time involved make indirect cast restorations more expensive than direct restorations.
Technique Sensitive. Every step of the indirect procedure requires diligence and attention to detail. Errors at

any part of the long, multistep process tends to be compounded, resulting in a less-than-optimal restoration.
Splitting Forces. Small inlays may produce a wedging effect on facial and/or lingual tooth structure, and
thereby increase the potential for splitting the tooth.
I NITIAL PROCEDURES
Occlusion. Before an anesthetic is administered and
before preparation of any tooth, evaluate the occlusal
contacts of the teeth. As part of this evaluation, decide if
the existing occlusal relationships can be improved with
the cast metal restoration. An evaluation should include: (1) the occlusal contacts in maximum intercuspation (MI) where the teeth are brought into full interdigitation, and (2) the occlusal contacts that occur during
mandibular movements (Fig. 20-1). The pattern of occlusal contacts influences the preparation design, the selection of interocclusal records, and type of articulator
or cast development needed.
Anesthesia. Local anesthesia of the tooth to be operated on, as well as the adjacent soft tissues, usually is
advocated. Anesthetizing these tissues eliminates pain
and reduces salivation, resulting in a more pleasant operation for both the patient and the operator.
Considerations forTemporary Restorations. Before
preparation of the tooth, consideration must be given to
the method that will be used to fabricate the temporary
restoration. Most temporary restoration techniques require the use of a preoperative impression to reproduce
the occlusal, facial, and lingual surfaces of the temporary restoration to the preoperative contours.
The technique involves making a preoperative impression with an elastic impression material. Alginate
impression material is a common choice because it sets
quickly and is relatively inexpensive. If the tooth to be
restored has any large defects, such as a missing cusp,
either of two methods may be used to reproduce the
missing cusp in the temporary. First, a hand instrument
can be used to remove impression material in the area of
the missing cusp or tooth structure, to simulate the desired form for the temporary. Secondly, wax can be
added to the tooth before the impression as follows. Dry
the tooth, and fill the large defects with utility wax.
Smooth the wax, and make an impression using a quadrant tray if no more than two teeth are to be prepared
(Fig. 20-2, A). A full-arch tray may be used for greater
stability. Seat the tray filled with impression material
(see Fig. 20-2, B). After the impression has set, remove
the impression and examine it for completeness (see Fig.
20-2, C. Alginate impressions can distort quickly if they
are allowed to gain or lose moisture, so wrap the impression in wet paper towels to serve as a humidor (see
Fig. 20-2, D). The preoperative impression may be made
with a polyvinyl siloxane impression material if additional accuracy, stability, and durability are required
(such as when making multiple temporaries over an ex-

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG . 20-1 Evaluate occlusal relationships in MI (A), and during mandibular movements (B and
C). Be alert for problems with tooth alignment and contact position. Note the amount of posterior separation provided by the guidance of anterior teeth (working side) and articular eminence
( nonworking side).

FIG
20-2 A, Applying tray adhesive
to stock quadrant tray. B, Making preoperative impression. C, Inspecting
preoperative impression for completeness. D, When using alginate,
wrap impression with wet paper towels to serve as a humidor.

tended period of time). The preoperative impression is
set aside for later use in forming the temporary

TOOTH PREPARATIONS
FOR CLASS II CAST METAL
RESTORATIONS
A small distal, cavitated, carious lesion in the maxillary
right first premolar is used to illustrate the classic twosurface preparation for an inlay (Fig. 20-3, A). Treatment
principals for other defects are presented later in this
section. As indicated previously, few small one- or twosurface inlays are done. However, because the description of a small tooth preparation presents the basic concepts, it is used to illustrate the technique. More
extensive tooth preparations are presented later in the
chapter.

TOOTH PREPARATION FOR CLASS II CAST
METAL INLAYS
I nitial Preparation. Carbide burs used to develop the
vertical internal walls of the preparation for cast metal
inlays and onlays are plane cut, tapered fissure burs.
These burs are plane cut so the vertical walls will be
smooth. The side and end surfaces of the bur should be
straight to aid in the development of uniformly tapered
walls and smooth pulpal and gingival walls. Recommended dimensions and configurations of the burs to be
used are shown in Fig. 20-3, B. Suggested burs are the
No. 271 and the No. 169L (Brassler USA, Inc., Savannah,
Georgia). The operator is cautioned to verify the measurements of unfamiliar burs before they are used to
j udge depth into the tooth during preparation. Note that
the sides and end surface of the No. 271 bur meet in a
slightly rounded manner so that sharp, stress-inducing

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-3 A, Proposed outline form for DO preparation. B, Dimensions and configuration of No. 271, No. 169L, and No. 8862 instruments. C, Conventional 4-degree divergence from line of draw (line xy).
internal angles will not be formed in the preparation.'
The marginal bevels are placed with a slender, fine-grit,
flame shaped diamond instrument, such as the No. 8862
(Brassler USA, Inc., Savannah, Georgia).
Throughout preparation for a cast inlay, the cutting instruments used to develop the vertical walls are oriented to a
single "draw" path, usually the long axis of the tooth crown,
so that the completed preparation will have draft (no undercuts) (see Fig. 20-3, G). The gingival-to-occlusal divergence of these preparation walls may range from 2 to
5 degrees per wall from the line of draw. If the vertical
walls are unusually short, a maximum of 2 degrees occlusal divergence is desirable to increase retention potential. As the occlusogingival height increases, the occlusal divergence should increase because lengthy
preparations with minimal divergence (more parallel)
may present difficulties during pattern withdrawal, trial
seating and withdrawal of the casting, and cementing.
Occlusal Step. With the No. 271 carbide bur held
parallel to the long axis of the tooth crown, enter the
fossa/pit closest to the involved marginal ridge, using a
punch cut to a depth of 1.5 mm to establish the depth of
the pulpal wall (Fig. 20-4, A and B). In initial preparation do not exceed this specified depth, regardless of
whether the bur end is in dentin, caries, old restorative
material, or air. The bur should be rotating at high speed
( with air-water spray) before application to the tooth
and should not stop rotating until it is removed. This
minimizes perceptible vibration and prevents breakage
or chipping of the bur blades. A general rule is to maintain
the long axis of the bur parallel to the long axis of the tooth
crown at all times (see Fig. 20-4, B and C). For mandibular molars and second premolars whose crowns tilt
slightly lingually, this rule dictates that the bur should
tilt slightly (5 to 10 degrees) lingually to conserve the
strength of the lingual cusps (see Fig. 20-4, D). It is em-

phasized that when the operator is cutting at high
speeds, a properly directed air-water spray is used to
provide the necessary cooling and cleansing effects.'
Maintaining the 1.5-mm initial depth and the same
bur orientation, extend the preparation outline mesially
along the central groove/fissure to include the mesial
fossa/pit (see Fig. 20-4, E and F). Ideally the faciolingual
dimension of this cut should be minimal. Exercise care
to keep the mesial marginal ridge strong by not removing the dentin support of the ridge (see Fig. 20-4, F
and H). The use of light intermittent pressure will minimize heat production on the tooth surface and reduce
the incidence of enamel crazing ahead of the bur. Occasionally a fissure extends onto the mesial marginal
ridge. This defect, if shallow, may be treated with enameloplasty, or it may be included in the outline form with
the cavosurface bevel, which is applied in a later step in
the tooth preparation (see Fig. 20-4, G).
Enameloplasty, as presented in earlier chapters, will
occasionally reduce extension along the fissures,
thereby conserving tooth structure vital for pulp protection and strength of the remaining tooth crown. The extent to which enameloplasty can be used usually cannot
be determined until the operator is in the process of extending the preparation wall, when the depth of the fissure in the enamel wall can be observed (Fig. 20-5).
When enameloplasty proves a fissure in a marginal
ridge to be deeper than one third the thickness of the
enamel, then utilize the procedures described in the
later section.
Extend to include faulty facial and lingual fissures radiating from the mesial pit. During this extension cutting, the operator is cautioned again not to remove the
dentin support of the proximal marginal ridge. To conserve tooth structure and the strength of the remaining
tooth, the final extension up these fissures can be ac-

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG . 20-4 A and B, Bur after punch cut to a depth of 1.5 mm. C, For maxillary posterior teeth,
l ong axis of bur should parallel long axis of tooth crown (line yz). D, For molar and second premolar teeth of mandibular dentition, long axis of bur should tilt slightly lingually to parallel long
axis of tooth crown (line wx). E and F, Extending mesial wall, taking care to conserve dentin that
supports marginal ridge (s). G, Marginal bevel can provide additional extension. H, Improper extension that has weakened the marginal ridge.

complished with the slender No. 169L carbide bur (Fig.
20-6, A). Tooth structure and strength can be further
conserved by remembering that: (1) enameloplasty of
the fissure ends should be employed when possible and
(2) the marginal bevel of the final preparation often can
be used to include (eliminate) the terminal ends of these
fissures in the outline form. The facial and lingual extension in the mesial pit region should provide the desired dovetail retention form, which resists distal displacement of the inlay (see Fig. 20-6, B). When these facial
and lingual grooves are not faulty, sufficient facial extension in the mesial pit region should be made, nevertheless, to provide this dovetail retention form against

distal displacement. Minor extension in the transverse
ridge area to include remaining facial or lingual caries
may necessitate additional facial or lingual extension in
the mesial pit to provide this dovetail feature. (Recall
the principle that during such facial or lingual extensions to sound tooth structure, the bur depth is maintained at 1.5 mm.) If major facial or lingual extension is
required to remove undermined occlusal enamel, capping the weak remaining cuspal structure may be indicated, as well as additional features in the preparation
to provide adequate retention and resistance forms.
These considerations are discussed in the subsequent
sections.

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG. 20-5 A, Shallow enamel fault that is no
deeper than one third the thickness of enamel.
B, Using fine-grit diamond instrument to remove enamel that contains shallow fault.

FIG. 20-6 A, Extending up the mesiofacial triangular groove using slender No. 169L bur. B,
Dovetail retention form is created by extension shown in A. As xfits into yonly in one direction
resulting in z, similarly dovetail portion of inlay fits into dovetail portion of preparation only in
an occlusal-to-gingival direction.

Continuing at the initial depth, extend the occlusal
step distally into the distal marginal ridge sufficiently to
expose the junction of the proximal enamel and the
dentin (Fig. 20-7, A and B). While extending distally,
progressively widen the preparation to the desired
faciolingual width in anticipation for the proximal box
preparation. The increased faciolingual width enables
the facial and lingual walls of the box to project (visually) perpendicularly to the proximal surface at positions that will clear the adjacent tooth by 0.2 to 0.5 mm
(see Fig. 20-7, F). The facial and lingual walls of the occlusal step should go around the cusps in graceful
curves, and the prepared isthmus in the transverse
ridge ideally should be only slightly wider than the bur,
thus conserving dentinal protection for the pulp and
maintaining strength of the cusps. If the occlusal step
has been prepared correctly, any caries on the pulpal
floor should be uncovered by facial and lingual extension to sound enamel (supported by dentin).
Proximal Box. Continuing with the No. 271 carbide
bur, isolate the distal enamel by cutting a proximal ditch

(see Fig. 20-7, C to F). Allow the harder enamel to guide
the bur. Slight pressure toward the enamel is necessary
to prevent the bur from cutting only dentin. If the bur is
allowed to cut only dentin, the resulting axial wall will
be too deep. The mesiodistal width of the ditch should
be 0.8 mm (the tip diameter of the bur) and prepared approximately two thirds (0.5 mm) at the expense of
dentin and one third (0.3 mm) at the expense of enamel.
The gingival extension of this cut may be checked with
the length of the bur by first measuring the depth from
the height of the marginal ridge and then removing the
bur and holding it beside the tooth. A periodontal probe
also may be used for this measurement. While penetrating gingivally, extend the proximal ditch facially and
lingually beyond the caries to the desired position of the
facioaxial and linguoaxial line angles. If the carious lesion is minimal, the ideal extension facially and lingually will be as previously described (see Fig. 20-7, F).
Ideal extension gingivally of a minimal, cavitated lesion
will eliminate caries on the gingival floor and provide
0.5-mm clearance of the unbeveled gingival margin

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-7 A, After exposing junction (j) of proximal
enamel and dentin. B, Sectional drawing of
A. C, Cutting proximal ditch. D, Sectional drawing of
C. E, Proximal view of D. F, Occlusal view of proximal
ditch with proposed ideal clearance with adjacent
tooth. G and H, Proximal ditch extended distally. x,
Penetration of enamel by side of bur at its gingival
end. I, Breaking away isolated enamel.

with the adjacent tooth. Moderate-to-extensive caries on
the proximal surface dictates continued extension of the
proximal ditch to the extent of the caries at the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ), but not pulpally (see Fig. 20-11, D).
When preparing the proximal portion of the preparation,
maintain the side of the bur at the specified axial wall depth
regardless of whether it is in dentin, caries, old restorative
material, or air. Guard against overcutting the facial, lingual, and gingival walls, which would not conserve
tooth structure and could result in: (1) overextension of
the margins in the completed preparation, (2) a weakened tooth, and (3) possible injury of the soft tissue. Be-

cause the proximal enamel diminishes in thickness from
the occlusal to gingival level, the end of the bur will be
closer to the external tooth surface as the cutting progresses gingivally. The axial wall should follow the contour of the tooth faciolingually. Any carious dentin on the
axial wall should not be removed at this stage of preparation.
Then with the No. 271 carbide bur, make two cuts,
one at the facial limit of the proximal ditch and the other
at the lingual limit, extending from the ditch perpendicularly toward the enamel surface (in the direction of the
enamel rods) (see Fig. 20-7, G). Extend these cuts until
the bur is nearly through the marginal ridge enamel (the

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

side of the bur may emerge slightly through the surface
at the level of the gingival floor) as shown in Fig. 20-7,
H. This weakens the enamel by which the remaining
isolated portion is held. Also, confirm the level of the
gingival floor by observing where the end of the bur
emerged through the proximal surface. If indicated, additional gingival extension can be accomplished while
the remaining enamel still serves to guide the bur and
prevent it from marring the proximal surface of the adjacent tooth. At this time, however, the remaining wall
of enamel often breaks away during cutting, especially
when high speeds are employed. If the isolated wall of
enamel is still present, it can be fractured out with a
spoon excavator (see Fig. 20-7, I). At this stage, the
ragged enamel edges left from breaking away the proximal surface may be touching the adjacent tooth.
Planing the distofacial, distolingual, and gingival
walls by hand instruments to remove all undermined
enamel may be indicated if minimal extension is needed
to fulfill an esthetic objective. Depending on access, use
a No. 15 (width) straight chisel, binangle chisel (Fig.
20-8), or enamel hatchet. For a right-handed operator,
the distal beveled binangle chisel is used on the distofacial wall of a distoocclusal (DO) preparation for the
maxillary right premolar. Plane the wall by holding the
instrument in the modified palm-and-thumb grasp, and
use a chisel-like motion in an occlusal-to-gingival direction (see Fig. 20-8, A and B). Plane the gingival wall by
using the same instrument as a hoe, scraping in a lingual-to-facial direction (see Fig. 20-8, C). In this latter action the axial wall may be planed with the side edge
(secondary edge) of the blade. The distolingual wall is
planed smooth by using the binangle chisel with the
mesial bevel (see Fig. 20-8, D). When proximal caries is
minimal, ideal facial and lingual extension at this step in
the preparation results in margins that clear the adjacent
tooth by 0.2 to 0.5 mm.
The experienced operator usually does not use chisel
hand instruments during preparation for inlays, inasmuch as the narrow, flame-shaped, fine-grit diamond
instrument, when artfully used, will remove ragged,
weak enamel during application of the cavosurface
bevel and flares and will cause the patient to be less apprehensive (see Figs. 20-12 and 20-13). If the diamond
instrument is to be used exclusively in finishing the
enamel walls and margins, this procedure is postponed
until after the removal of any remaining infected dentin
and/or old restorative material, and the application of
any necessary base. This prevents any hemorrhage
( which occasionally follows the beveling of the gingival
margin) from hindering: (1) the suitable removal of remaining infected dentin and old restorative material
and (2) the proper application of a necessary base. Hand
instruments are more useful on the mesiofacial surfaces
of the maxillary premolars and first molars, where min-

imal extension is desired to prevent an unsightly display of metal.
Shallow (0.3 mm deep) retention grooves may be cut in
the facioaxial and linguoaxial line-angles with the No.
169L carbide bur (see Fig. 20-8, E to I). These grooves are
indicated especially when the prepared tooth is short.
When properly positioned, the grooves are in sound
dentin, near but not contacting, the DEJ. The long axis of
the bur must be held parallel to the line of draw. Preparing these grooves may be postponed until after any required bases are applied during final preparation.
Final Preparation
Removal of Infected Carious Dentin and Pulp Protection. After the initial preparation has been completed, evaluate the internal walls of the preparation visually and tactilely (with an explorer) for indications of
remaining carious dentin. If carious dentin remains, and
if it is judged to be infected, but shallow or moderate
(1 mm or more of remaining dentin between the caries
and the pulp), satisfactory isolation for removal of such
caries and the application of any necessary base may be
attained by the reduction in salivation resulting from
anesthesia and the use of cotton rolls, a saliva ejector,
and gingival retraction cord. The retraction cord also
serves to widen the gingival sulcus and slightly retract
the gingiva in preparation for beveling and flaring the
proximal margins (Fig. 20-9; see also Fig. 20-12, A and
B). For insertion of the cord refer to the later sections,
Bevels and Flares and Tissue Retraction. The removal of
the remaining caries and placement of a necessary base
can be accomplished during the time required for the
full effect of the inserted cord. Use a slowly revolving
round bur (No. 2 or No. 4) or spoon excavator to remove
the carious infected dentin (see Fig. 20-9, F and G). If the
bur is used, improve visibility by using air alone. This
excavation is done just above stall-out speed with light,
intermittent cutting. Take care not to unnecessarily desiccate the exposed dentin during this procedure.
Light-cured glass-ionomer cement may be mixed and
applied with a suitable applicator to these shallow (or
moderately deep) excavated regions to the depth and
form of the ideally prepared surface. Placing a base
takes very little time and should be considered because
it results in working dies (subsequently in the laboratory phase) that have preparation walls with no undercuts, as well as "ideal" position and contour. Also, applying a base at this time minimizes additional irritation
of the pulp during subsequent procedures necessary for
the completion of the restoration. The light-cured glass
ionomer adheres to tooth structure and does not require
retentive undercuts when the base is small to moderate.
The material is applied by conveying small portions on
the end of a periodontal probe and is light-cured when
the correct form has been achieved (see Fig. 20-9, H and
I). Any excess cement can be trimmed back to ideal form

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-8 Using modified palm-and-thumb grasp (A) to plane distofacial and distolingual walls
( B and D) and to scrape gingival wall (C). E, Before cutting retention grooves. F, Cutting retention grooves. G and H, FPG, facial proximal groove; LPG, l i ngual proximal groove. I, Section in
plane x. Larger arrows depict direction of translation of rotating bur.

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-9 Moderately deep caries. Extending proximal ditch gingivally (B) to a sound floor free
from caries (C). D, Remaining caries on axial wall. E, Section of C in plane yy'. F, Removing remaining infected dentin. c, Inserted retraction cord. G, Section of F. H, Inserting glass-ionomer
base with periodontal probe. I, Completed base.

with the No. 271 carbide bur after the cement has
hardened.
If the carious lesion is judged to closely approach the
pulp, a rubber dam should be applied before the removal of infected dentin. This provides the optimal environment for successfully treating a pulp exposure
should it occur. When excavating extensive caries, attempt to remove only the infected dentin and not the affected dentin, since +removal of the latter might expose
a healthy pulp. Ideally, caries removal should continue
until the remaining dentin is as hard as normal dentin;
however, heavy pressure should not be applied with an
explorer tip (or any other instrument) on dentin next to
the pulp, lest an unnecessary pulpal exposure be created. If removal of soft, infected dentin leads directly to
a pulpal exposure (carious pulpal exposure), then root
canal treatment should be accomplished before completing the cast metal restoration.
If the pulp is inadvertently exposed as a result of operator error or misjudgment (mechanical pulpal expo-

sure), then it must be decided whether to proceed with
root canal treatment or to attempt a direct pulp capping
procedure. A clinical evaluation should be made regarding health of the pulp. A favorable prognosis for the
pulp after direct pulp capping may be expected if the
following criteria are met:

•

The exposure is small (less than 0.5 mm in diameter).
The tooth has been asymptomatic, showing no signs
of pulpitis.
Any hemorrhage from the exposure site is easily
controlled.
The invasion of the pulp chamber was relatively
atraumatic with little physical irritation to the pulp
tissue.
A clean, uncontaminated operating field is maintained (i.e., a rubber dam).

If the excavation closely approaches the pulp or if a direct pulp cap is indicated, first apply a lining of calcium

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-10 A, Deep caries excavations near
the pulp are first lined with calcium hydroxi de. Note rubber dam. B to D, Cutting retention coves for retaining glass-ionomer cement.

hydroxide using a flow technique (without pressure). This
calcium hydroxide liner should cover and protect any
possible near or actual exposure and also extend over a
major portion of the excavated dentin surface (Fig. 20-10,
A). Although undetected, there may be an exposed recessional tract of a pulp horn in any deep excavation. Calcium hydroxide treatment of an exposed, healthy pulp
promotes the formation of a dentin bridge, which would
close the exposure." Leave the peripheral 0.5 to 1 mm of
the dentin excavation available for bonding the lightcured glass-ionomer cement base subsequently applied.
Although the light-cured glass-ionomer cement is adhesive to dentin, large cement bases can be subjected to
considerable stresses during fabrication of the temporary, and try-in/ cementation of the cast metal restoration. Also, if a calcium hydroxide liner has been applied,
less dentin is available for adhesive bonding. In these
circumstances, small mechanical undercuts can increase
the retention of the glass-ionomer base. If suitable undercuts are not present after removal of infected dentin,
retention coves are placed with the No. 1/4 carbide bur
(see Fig. 20-10, B through D). These coves are placed in
the peripheral dentin of the excavation and are as remote from the pulp as possible. The light-cured glassionomer cement should be applied without pressure. It
should completely cover the calcium hydroxide lining
and some peripheral dentin for good adhesion (Fig. 2011). The cement base should be sufficiently thick in di-

mension to protect the thin underlying dentin and calcium hydroxide liner from subsequent stresses. Usually,
good resistance form dictates that the pulpal wall
should not be formed entirely by a cement base; rather,
in at least two regions, one diametrically across the excavation from the other, the pulpal wall should be in
normal position, flat, and formed by sound dentin (see
region s in Fig. 20-11, E, depicting basing in a mandibular molar). One should consider the addition of other retention features, such as proximal grooves, if a major
portion of a proximal axial wall is composed mostly of
cement base because this base should not be relied on
for contributing to retention of the cast restoration (see
Fig. 20-8, F).
Remaining old restorative material on the internal
walls should be removed if any of the following conditions are present: (1) the old material is judged to be thin
and/or nonretentive, (2) there is radiographic evidence
of caries under the old material, (3) the pulp was symptomatic preoperatively, or (4) the periphery of the remaining restorative material is not intact, (i.e., there is
some breach in the junction of the material with the adjacent tooth structure that may indicate caries under the
material). If none of these conditions is present, the operator may elect to leave the remaining restorative material to serve as a base, rather than risk unnecessary removal of sound dentin or irritation or exposure of the
pulp. The same isolation conditions described previously for removal of infected dentin also apply for the
removal of old restorative material.
After the cement has hardened, spread a thin coat of
petroleum jelly over the base with a small cotton pellet.
This serves to prevent the adherence of subsequently
applied unpolymerized materials such as the material
used for the temporary restoration and the final impression material.

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

The future need of root canal therapy is a possibility
for any tooth treated for deep caries that approximates
or exposes the pulp. When treating a tooth that has had
such extensive caries, consider (1) reducing all cusps to
cover the occlusal surface with metal, for better distribution of occlusal loads and (2) adding skirts to the
preparation to augment resistance form because teeth
are more prone to fracture after root canal therapy.
Preparation of Bevels and Flares. After the cement
base (where indicated) is completed, the slender, flameshaped, fine-grit diamond instrument is used to bevel
the occlusal and gingival margins and to apply the secondary flare on the distolingual and distofacial walls.
This should result in 30- to 40-degree marginal metal on
the inlay (Figs. 20-12, H, 20-13, J, and 20-14, B). This
cavosurface design helps seal and protect the margins
and results in a strong enamel margin with an angle of
140 to 150 degrees. A cavosurface enamel angle of more
than 150 degrees is incorrect because it results in a less
defined enamel margin (finish line), and the marginal
cast metal alloy is too thin and weak if its angle is less
than 30 degrees. Conversely, if the enamel margin is
140 degrees or less, the metal is too bulky and difficult
to burnish when its angle is greater than 40 degrees (see
Fig. 20-14, F).
Usually it is helpful to insert a gingival retraction cord
of suitable diameter into the gingival sulcus adjacent to
the gingival margin, and leave it in place for several
minutes just before the use of the flame-shaped diamond instrument on the proximal margins (see Fig. 20-12,
A through C). The cord should be small enough in di-

ameter to permit relatively easy insertion and to preclude excessive pressure against the gingival tissue, yet
it should be large enough to widen the sulcus to about
0.5 mm. Immediately before the flame-shaped diamond
instrument is used, the cord may be removed, resulting
in an open sulcus that improves visibility for beveling
the gingival margin and helps prevent injury and subsequent hemorrhage of the gingival tissue. However,
some operators prefer to leave the cord in the sulcus
while placing the gingival bevel.
Using the flame-shaped diamond instrument, rotating at high speed, prepare the lingual secondary flare
(see Figs. 20-12, D through F, and 20-13, A). Approach
from the lingual embrasure, as shown in Fig. 20-12, F,
moving the instrument mesiofacially. Compare the direction of the distolingual wall and the position of the
distolingual margin before and after this extension (see
Figs. 20-8, G, and 20-13, A). Notice in Fig. 20-13, A, that
the distolingual wall extends from the linguoaxial line
angle into the lingual embrasure in two planes. The first
is termed the lingual primary flare; the second is named
the lingual secondary flare. During this (secondary) flaring operation, the long axis of the instrument is held
nearly parallel to the line of draw, with only a slight tilting mesially and lingually for assurance of draft (see
Fig. 20-12, D and E), and the direction of translation of
the instrument is that which results in a marginal metal
angle of 40 degrees (see Figs. 20-12, F, and 20-13, J).
Bevel the gingival margin by moving the instrument
facially along the gingival margin (see Figs. 20-12, G,
and 20-13, A). While cutting the gingival bevel, reduce the

CHAPTER 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-12 A and B, Retraction cord is inserted in gingival sulcus and left for several minutes.
C, "Open" gingival sulcus after cord shown in A is removed facilitates beveling gingival margin
with diamond instrument. D to F, Diamond instrument preparing lingual secondary flare. Large
arrow in F depicts direction of translation. G, Beveling gingival margin. Note in C the mesial tilti ng of diamond instrument to produce a bevel properly directed to result in 30-degree marginal
metal as shown in H. H, Properly directed gingival bevel resulting in 30-degree marginal metal.
I, Failing to bevel gingival margin results in weak margin formed by undermined rods (note easil y displaced wedge of enamel) and 110-degree marginal metal, an angular design unsuitable
for burnishing. J, Lap, sliding fit of prescribed bevel metal decreases 50-um error of seating to
20 um. K, A 50-um error of seating will produce an equal cement line of 50 um along unbeveled
gingival margin.

rotational speed to increase the sense of touch; otherwise overbeveling may result. The instrument should be
tilted slightly mesially to produce a gingival bevel with
the correct steepness to result in 30-degree marginal
metal (see Fig. 20-12, C, H, and J). If the instrument is
not tilted in this manner, the bevel will be too steep, resulting in gingival bevel metal that is too thin (less than
30-degree metal) and thus too weak. Although the instrument is tilted mesially, its long axis must not tilt fa-

cially or lingually (see Fig. 20-12, G). The gingival bevel
should be 0.5 to 1 mm wide and should blend with the lingual secondary flare.
Complete the gingival bevel, and then prepare the facial secondary flare (see Fig. 20-13, A through F). The
long axis of the instrument during this secondary flare
is again returned nearly to the line of draw with only a
small tilting mesially and facially, and the direction of
translation of the instrument is that which results in

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-13A,

Occlusal view of Fig. 20-12, G. LSFand LPFdesignate lingual secondary and lingual primary flares. B to D, Preparing facial secondary flare. Large arrows in B, D, and E depict
direction of translation. F, Completed facial secondary flare. FSF and FPF designate facial secondary and facial primary flares. G, Distal view of F. x, Plane of cross-section shown in J. Prepari ng secondary flare with the No. 169L carbide bur (H) or with paper disc (1). J, Secondary flares
are directed to result in 40-degree marginal metal and 140-degree marginal enamel.

40-degree marginal metal (see Fig. 20-13, E and J).
When the adjacent proximal surface (mesial of the second premolar) is not being prepared, care must be exercised neither to abrade the adjacent tooth nor to
overextend the distofacial margin. To help in preventing such abrasion or overextension, the instrument may
be raised occlusally (thus using the narrower portion at
its tip end) to complete the most facial portion of the
wall and margin (see Fig. 20-13, D). Also, the more slender No. 169L carbide bur may be used rather than the
flame-shaped diamond instrument (see Fig. 20-13, H).
Moreover, the No. 169L bur produces an extremely
smooth surface to the secondary flare and a smooth,
straight distofacial margin. When access permits, a
fine-grit sandpaper disc may be used on the facial and
lingual walls and margins of the proximal preparation,
especially when minimal extension of the facial margin
is desired (see Fig. 20-13, I). This produces smooth walls
and helps create respective margins that are straight
(not ragged) and sound.
In the flaring and beveling of the proximal margins,
as described in the previous paragraphs, the procedure

began at the lingual surface and proceeded to the facial
surface; however, the direction may be reversed, starting at the facial surface and moving toward the lingual
surface. On the mesiofacial surface of maxillary premolars and first molars where extension of the facial margin should be minimal, it is usually desirable to use the
lingual-to-facial direction.
The gingival bevel serves the following purposes:
•

Weak enamel is removed. If the gingival margin is in
the enamel, it would be weak if not beveled because
of the gingival declination of the enamel rods (see
Fig. 20-12, I).
The bevel results in 30-degree metal that is burnishable
(on the die) because of its angular design (see
Fig. 20-12, H). Bulky 110-degree metal along an unbeveled margin is not burnishable (see Fig. 20-12, I).
A lap, sliding fit is produced at the gingival margin
(see Fig. 20-12, J). This helps improve the fit of the
casting in this region. With the prescribed gingival
bevel, if the inlay fails to seat by 50 um, the void
between the bevel metal and the gingival bevel on

CHAPTER 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-14 A, Diamond instrument beveling occlusal margin when it is indicated to result in
40-degree marginal metal as shown in B. Angles x and x'are equal because opposite angles are
equal when two lines ( L and L') i ntersect. Therefore diamond instrument is always directed so
that an angle of 40 degrees is made by side of instrument and external enamel surface. B, Occlusal marginal metal is approximately 40 degrees in cross-section, thus making enamel angle
140 degrees. C, When cuspal inclines are steep, no beveling is indicated inasmuch as 40-degree
metal will result without beveling. D, Beveling mesial margin and axiopulpal line angle. E, Mesial
bevel is directed correctly to result in 40-degree marginal metal. F, Unbeveled mesial margin is
i ncorrect because it results both in weak enamel margin and unburnishable marginal metal. G,
To conserve dentin support (s), occlusal defects on marginal ridge are included in outline form
by applying cavosurface bevel, which may be wider than usual, when necessary. H, Occlusal
view of G. Preparing 140-degree cavosurface enamel angle at regions labeled y usually dictates
that occlusal bevel be extended over marginal ridges into secondary flares. I, Distal view of H.

the tooth may be as small as 20 um; however, failure to apply such a bevel would result in a void
(and a cement line) as great as the failure to seat
(see Fig. 20-12, K).
Uninterrupted blending of the gingival bevel into the
secondary flares of the distolingual and distofacial walls
results in the distolingual and distofacial margins joining the gingival margin in a desirable arc of a small circle; also, the gingivofacial and gingivolingual line angles no longer extend to the marginal outline. If such line
angles are allowed to extend to the preparation outline, early
failure may follow because of an "open" margin, dissolution
of exposed cement, and eventual leakage, all potentially resulting in caries.
The secondary flare is necessary for several reasons:
(1) The secondary flaring of the proximal walls ex-

tends the margins into the embrasures, making these
margins more self-cleansing and more accessible to
finishing procedures during the inlay insertion appointment, and does so with conservation of the
dentin. (2) The direction of the flare results in 40-degree marginal metal (see Fig. 20-13, j). Metal with this
angular design is burnishable; however, metal shaped
at a larger angle is unsatisfactory for burnishing;
metal with an angle less than 30 degrees is too thin
and weak, with a corresponding enamel margin that is
too indefinite and ragged. (3) A more blunted and
stronger enamel margin is produced because of the
secondary flare.
In a later section, the secondary flare is omitted for esthetic reasons on the mesiofacial proximal wall of
preparations on premolars and first molars of the maxillary dentition. In this location the wall is completed

816

C H A P T E R 20

Class I I Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-15 A, Completed DO preparation for inlay.
B, MOD preparation for inlay on maxillary right first premolar, DO view. C, Same preparation as in B, MO view.
D, Same preparation as in B, occlusal view. Note absence, for esthetic reasons, of secondary flare on mesiofacial aspect and minimal extension of mesiofacial
margin.

with minimal extension by using either hand instruments (straight or binangle chisel) followed by a finegrit sandpaper disc or very thin rotary instruments.
The flame-shaped, fine-grit diamond instrument also
is used for occlusal bevels. The width of the cavosurface
bevel on the occlusal margin should be approximately
one fourth the depth of the respective wall (see Fig. 2014, A and B). The exception to the rule is when a wider
bevel is desired to include an enamel defect (see Fig. 2014, G and H). The resulting occlusal marginal metal of
the inlay should be 40-degree metal; thus the occlusal
marginal enamel is 140-degree enamel (see Fig. 20-14, B
and E). Beveling the occlusal margins in this manner increases the strength of the marginal enamel and helps
seal and protect the margins. While beveling the occlusal margins, a guide to diamond positioning is to
maintain an approximate 40-degree angle between the
side of the instrument and the external enamel surface.
This also indicates when an occlusal bevel is necessary
(see Fig. 20-14, A). For example, if the cusp inclines are
so steep that the diamond instrument, when positioned
at a 40-degree angle to the external enamel surface is
parallel with the enamel preparation wall, then no bevel
is indicated (see Fig. 20-14, C). Using this technique
demonstrates that margins on the proximal marginal
ridges always require a cavosurface bevel (see Fig. 2014, D and I). Failure to apply a bevel in these regions
leaves the enamel margin weak and subject to injury by
fracture, both before the inlay insertion appointment
and during the try-in of the inlay when burnishing the
marginal metal. Also, the failure to bevel margins on the
marginal ridges results in metal alloy that is difficult to
burnish because it is too bulky (see Fig. 20-14, F). Similarly, the importance of extending the occlusal bevel to
include those portions of the occlusal margin that cross

over the marginal ridge cannot be overemphasized (see
Fig. 20-14, H and I). These margins are beveled to result
in 40-degree marginal metal. Otherwise fracture of the
enamel margin in such stress-vulnerable regions may
occur in the interim between the preparation and the cementation appointment.
The diamond instrument also is used to lightly bevel
the axiopulpal line angle (see Fig. 20-14, D). Such a bevel
provides a thicker and therefore stronger wax pattern at
this critical region.
Thus the desirable metal angle at the margins of inlays is 40 degrees, except at the gingival margins, where
the metal angle should be 30 degrees. The completed
preparation is illustrated in Fig. 20-15, A.
Modifications in Inlay Tooth Preparations. Again,
realizing that the indications for small inlays are rare,
the following sections provide procedural information
that may promote better understanding of their applications in more complex and larger inlay or onlay
restorations.
Mesioocclusodistal Preparation. If a marginal ridge
is severely weakened because of excessive extension, the
preparation outline often should be altered to include
the proximal surface. For example, the DO preparation
illustrated in the previous section would be extended to
a mesioocclusodistal (MOD) preparation (Fig. 20-16, A
through C; see also Fig. 20-15, B through D). The decision
to extend the preparation in this manner calls for clinical
j udgment as to whether the remaining marginal ridge
will withstand occlusal forces without fracture. A fortunate factor in favor of not extending the preparation is
that such ridge enamel is usually composed of gnarled
enamel and thus is stronger than it appears.
Obviously, caries present on both proximal surfaces
will result in a MOD preparation and restoration. The

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-16 Mandibular first premolar
prepared for MOD inlay, distal view (A),
mesial view (B), and occlusal view (C).

only difference in technique as described previously is
the inclusion of the other proximal surface.
Modifications of Class 11 Preparation for Esthetics.

For esthetic reasons, minimal flare is desired for the
mesiofacial proximal wall in the maxillary premolars
and first molars in Class II cast metal preparations (see
Fig. 20-15, D). The mesiofacial margin is minimally extended facially of contact to such a position that the
margin is barely visible from a facial viewing position.
To accomplish this, the secondary flare is omitted, and
the wall and margin are developed with either (1) a
chisel or enamel hatchet and final smoothing with a
fine-grit paper disc, or (2) a narrow diamond or bur
when access permits.
Facial or Lingual Surface Groove Extension. Sometimes a faulty facial groove (fissure) on the occlusal surface is continuous with a faulty facial surface groove
(mandibular molars), or a faulty distal oblique groove
on the occlusal surface is continuous with a faulty lingual surface groove (maxillary molar). This requires extension of the preparation outline to include the fissure
to its termination (Fig. 20-17; see also Fig. 20-19, C). Occasionally the operator may extend further gingivally
than the fissure length to improve retention form. Such
groove extensions, when sufficiently long, are very effective for increasing retention. Likewise, this extension
may be indicated to provide sufficient retention form
even though the facial or lingual surface grooves are not
fissured.
For extension onto the facial surface, use the No. 271
carbide bur held parallel to the line of draw, and extend
through the facial ridge (see Fig. 20-17, A and B). The
depth of the cut should be 1.5 mm. The floor (pulpal
wall) should be continuous with the pulpal wall of the
occlusal portion of the preparation (see Fig. 20-17, D).
With the bur still aligned with the path of draw, use
the side of the bur to cut the facial surface portion of this
extension (see Fig. 20-17, C). The diameter of the bur
serves as a depth gauge for the axial wall, which is in
dentin. The blade portion of the No. 271 bur is 0.8 mm
in diameter at its tip end and 1 mm at the neck; the axial wall depth should approximate 1 mm or slightly
more. The bur should be tilted lingually as it is drawn
occlusally, to develop the uniform depth of the axial

wall (see Fig. 20-17, D). The same principles apply for
extension of a lingual surface groove.
When a facial or lingual groove is included, it also
must be beveled. With the flame-shaped, fine-grit diamond instrument, bevel the gingival margin (using no
more than one third the depth of the gingival floor) to
provide for 30-degree marginal metal (see Fig. 20-17, E).
Apply a light bevel on the mesial and distal margins
that will be continuous with the occlusal and gingival
bevels and will result in 40-degree metal at these margins (see Fig. 20-17, F and G). The bevel width around
the extended groove will be approximately 0.5 mm.
Class 11 Preparation for Abutment Teeth and Extension Gingivally to Include Root-Surface Lesions.

Extending the facial, lingual, and gingival margins may
be indicated on the proximal surfaces of abutments for
removable partial dentures to increase the surface area
for development of guiding planes. In addition, the occlusal outline form must be wide enough faciolingually
to accommodate any contemplated rest preparation(s)
without involving the margins of the restoration. These
extensions may be accomplished by simply increasing
the width of the bevels.
The following modified preparation is recommended
when further gingival extension is indicated to include
a root lesion on the proximal surface. The gingival extension should be accomplished primarily by lengthening the gingival bevel, especially when preparing a
tooth that has a longer clinical crown than normal as a
result of gingival recession. It is necessary to only
slightly extend (gingivally) the gingival floor, and although the axial wall consequently must be moved pulpally, this should be minimal. If additional extension of
the gingival floor is necessary, it should not be as wide
pulpally as when the floor level is at a normal position
(Fig. 20-18, A). These considerations are necessary because of the draft requirement and because the tooth is
smaller apically. Extending the preparation gingivally
without these modifications would result in a dangerous encroachment of the axial wall on the pulp (see
Fig. 20-18, B).
Maxillary First Molar with Unaffected, Strong
Oblique Ridge. When a maxillary first molar is to be re-

stored, consideration should be given to preserving the

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-17 A to C, Extending to include occlusal fissure that is continuous with facial fissure on
facial surface. D, Section of C. Beveling gingival margin (E) and mesial and distal margins
( F) of fissure extension. G, Beveling completed.

C H A P T E R 20

FIG. 20-18

Modifications of preparation when extending to
i nclude proximal root-surface lesions after moderate gingival
recession. A, Correct. B, Incorrect. Note decreased dentinal
protection of pulp, compared with management depicted in A.

oblique ridge if it is strong and unaffected, especially if
only one proximal surface is carious. A mesioocclusal
(MO) preparation for an inlay is illustrated in Fig. 20-19, A
and B.
If a distal surface lesion appears subsequently to the
insertion of a MO restoration, the tooth may be prepared for a distoocclusolingual inlay (see Fig. 20-19, H
and I). The distoocclusolingual restoration that caps the
distolingual cusp is preferable to the DO restoration because it protects the miniature distolingual cusp from
subsequent fracture. The distoocclusolingual preparation requires diligent application to develop satisfactory
retention and resistance forms. Retention form is attained by: (1) creating a maximum of 2-degree occlusal
divergence of the vertical walls, (2) accentuating some
line angles, and (3) extending the lingual surface groove
to create an axial wall height in this extension of at least
2.5 mm occlusogingivally. Proper resistance form dictates: (1) routine capping of the distolingual cusp and
(2) maintaining sound tooth structure between the lingual surface groove extension and the distolingual wall
of the proximal boxing.
To prepare the distoocclusolingual preparation, first
reduce the distolingual cusp with the side of the No. 271
carbide bur. The cusp should be reduced a uniform
1.5 mm. Next prepare the remaining occlusal step of the
preparation with the No. 271 carbide bur. Then prepare
the proximal box portion of the preparation. Prepare the
lingual groove extension only after the position of the
distolingual wall of the proximal boxing is established.
This permits the operator to judge the best position of
the lingual surface groove extension to maintain a minimum of 3 mm of sound tooth structure between this extension and the distolingual wall. If this is not possible
because of extensive caries, then a more extensive type
of preparation may be indicated (one that crosses the
oblique ridge). Use the side of the No. 271 carbide bur
to produce the lingual surface groove extension (see
Fig. 20-19, C). The diameter of the bur is the gauge for
the depth (pulpally) of the axial wall in this extension,
and the occlusogingival dimension of this axial wall is a
minimum of 2.5 mm. With the end of this bur, also es-

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

tablish a 2-mm depth to that portion of the pulpal floor
that connects the proximal boxing to the lingual surface
groove extension. This additional depth to the pulpal
floor helps strengthen the wax pattern and casting in
later steps of fabrication. This should create a definite
0.5-mm step from the reduced distolingual cusp to the
pulpal floor.
Using the No. 169L carbide bur, increase retention
form in the distoocclusolingual preparation by: (1) creating mesioaxial and distoaxial grooves in the lingual
surface groove extension (see Fig. 20-19, D) and (2) preparing facial and lingual retention grooves in the distal
boxing (see Fig. 20-19, E).
Use the flame-shaped, fine-grit diamond instrument
to bevel the proximal gingival margin and to prepare
the secondary flares on the proximal enamel walls, as
well as to bevel the lingual margins. A lingual counterbevel is prepared on the distolingual cusp that is generous in width and results in 30-degree metal at the margin (see Fig. 20-19, F). Occlusion should be checked at
this point because the counterbevel should be sufficiently wide to extend beyond any occlusal contacts, either in MI or during mandibular movements. The bevel
on the gingival margin of the lingual extension should
be 0.5 mm wide and should provide for a 30-degree
metal angle. The bevels on the mesial and distal margins of the lingual extension are also approximately
0.5 mm wide and result in 40-degree marginal metal.
Fissures in the Facial and Lingual Cusp Ridges or
Marginal Ridges. In the preparation of Class II preparations for inlays, facial and lingual occlusal fissures
may extend nearly to, or through, the respective facial
and lingual cusp ridges, but not onto the facial or lingual surface. Proper outline form dictates that the
preparation margin should not cross such fissures, but
should be extended to include them. For example, when
preparing the occlusal step portion of the preparation,
initially extend along the lingual fissure with the No.
271 carbide bur until only 2 mm of tooth structure remains between the bur and the lingual surface of the
tooth. Additional lingual extension at this time is incorrect because it may remove the supporting dentin unnecessarily (Fig. 20-20, A and B). If this extension almost
includes the length of the fissure, remember that additional extension is achieved later by virtue of the occlusal bevel; moreover, this bevel may be wider than
conventional if the remaining fissure can be eliminated
by such a wider bevel (see Fig. 20-20, C). Also recall that
enameloplasty sometimes may eliminate the end portion of the fissure and provide a smooth enamel surface
where once there was a fault, thus reducing the extent of
the required extension (see Fig. 20-20, D). Therefore if
possible, include the fissure in the preparation outline
without extending the margin to the height of the ridge.
If, however, the occlusal bevel places the margin on the
height of the ridge, then the marginal enamel likely is

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-19 A and B, MO preparation on maxillary molar having unaffected oblique ridge. C,
Preparing lingual groove extension of distoocclusolingual preparation. Cutting retention
grooves in lingual surface extension (D) and distal box (E). F and G, Completed distoocclusolingual preparation on maxillary molar having unaffected oblique ridge. H and I, Preparations for
treating both proximal surfaces of maxillary molar having strong, unaffected oblique ridge.

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

20-20 A, Extending to include lingual (occlusal) fissure. B, Section of A. Dentin support (s)
of lingual cusp ridge should not be removed. Bevel can provide additional extension to include
fissure that does not extend to crest of ridge. C, Completed preparations with standard width
bevel (x) and with wider bevel to include groove defect that nearly extends to ridge height (y).
D, Completed preparation illustrating enameloplasty for elimination of shallow fissure extendi ng to or through lingual ridge height. (Compare smooth, saucer-shaped lingual ridge contour
FIG .

with C, where no enameloplasty has been performed.) E, Fissure remaining through lingual
ridge following unsuccessful enameloplasty. This indicates procedures subsequently illustrated.
Extending preparation if enameloplasty has not eliminated fissure in lingual ridge (F) or facial
ridge (G). H, Section of F. Completed preparations after beveling margins of extensions through
li ngual ridge (I) and facial ridge (J).

weak because of both its sharpness and the inclination
of the enamel rods in this region. Therefore the preparation outline should be extended just onto the facial or
lingual surface (see Fig. 20-20, I and J). Such extension
onto the facial or lingual surface would also be indicated if the fissure still remains through the ridge after
enameloplasty (see Fig. 20-20, E).
When necessary, extension through a cusp ridge is accomplished by cutting through the ridge at a depth of

1 mm with the No. 271 carbide bur (see Fig. 20-20, F and
G). Bevel the margins of the extension with the flame
shaped, fine-grit diamond instrument to provide for the
desired 40-degree marginal metal on the occlusal,
mesial, and distal margins and for 30-degree marginal
metal on the gingival margin (see Fig. 20-20, C, D, I, and J).
In the same manner, manage the fissures that may extend into or through a proximal marginal ridge, assuming that the proximal surface otherwise was not to be

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG . 20-21 Fissure that remains on mesial marginal ridge
after unsuccessful enameloplasty (A) is treated (B) in same
manner as lingual or facial ridge fissures (see Fig. 20-20,
/ and J).

included in the outline form and that such fissure management does not extend the preparation outline near
the adjacent tooth contact. This treatment particularly
applies to a mesial fissure of the maxillary first premolar (Fig. 20-21). If this procedure extends the margin
near or into the contact, the outline form on the affected
proximal surface must be extended to include the contact, as for a conventional proximal surface preparation.
Capping Cusps. The facial and lingual margins on
the occlusal surface frequently must be extended toward the cusp tips to the extent of existing restorative
materials and to uncover caries (Fig. 20-22, B and C).
Undermined occlusal enamel should be removed because it is weak; moreover, removing such enamel provides access for proper excavation of caries. When the
occlusal outline is extended up the cusp slopes more
than half the distance from any primary occlusal groove
(central, facial, or lingual) to the cusp tip, capping the
cusp should be considered. If the preparation outline is
extended two thirds of this distance or more, capping
the cusp is usually necessary to: (1) protect the weak,
underlying cuspal structure from fracture caused by
masticatory force and (2) remove the occlusal margin
from a region subjected to heavy stress and wear (see
Fig. 20-22, A and B). At this point in preparation the pulpal floor, depth can be increased from 1.5 mm to 2 mm.
This additional pulpal depth ensures sufficient reduction in an area that is often underreduced, and will result in greater strength and rigidity to the wax pattern
and cast restoration. The following section describes the
technique for capping less than all of the cusps of a posterior tooth.
Reduce the Cusps for Capping as Soon as the Indication for Such Capping Is Determined Because
This Improves Access and Visibility for Subsequent
Steps in Preparation. If a cusp is in infraocclusion of
the desired occlusal plane before reduction, then the
amount of cusp reduction is less and needs only to be
that which provides the required clearance with the desired occlusal plane. Before reducing the surface, prepare depth gauge grooves (depth cuts) with the side of the
No. 271 carbide bur (see Fig. 20-22, D). Such depth cuts
should help to prevent thin spots in the restoration.

With the depth cuts serving as guides, complete the
cusp reduction with the side of the carbide bur (see
Fig. 20-22, E). The reduction should provide for a uniform 1.5 mm of metal thickness over the reduced cusp.
On maxillary premolars and first molars, the reduction
should be minimal (i.e., 0.75 to 1 mm) on the facial cusp
ridge to decrease the display of metal. This reduction
should increase progressively to 1.5 mm toward the center of the tooth to help provide rigidity to the capping
metal (Fig. 20-23, A and C).
If only one of the two lingual cusps of a molar is reduced for capping, the reduction must extend to just include the lingual groove between the reduced and unreduced cusps. This reduction should terminate with a
distinct vertical wall that has a height that is the same as
the prescribed cusp reduction. Applying the bur vertically, as shown in Fig. 20-22, F, should help establish a
vertical wall of proper depth and direction. Similar
principles apply when only one of the facial cusps is to
be reduced (see Figs. 20-22, L, and 20-23, B).
A bevel of generous width is prepared on the facial
(lingual) margin of a reduced cusp with the flameshaped, fine-grit diamond instrument (with the exception of esthetically prominent areas). This bevel is referred to as a reverse bevel or counterbevel. The width
varies because it usually should extend beyond any occlusal contact with the opponent teeth, either in MI or
during mandibular movements (see Fig. 20-26, C). It
should be at an angle that results in 30-degree marginal
metal (see Fig. 20-22, G and H). The exception is the facial margin on maxillary premolars and the first molar
where esthetic requirements dictate only a blunting and
smoothing of the enamel margin (a stub margin) by the
light application of a fine-grit sandpaper disc or the
fine-grit diamond instrument (flame-shaped) held at a
right angle to the facial surface (see Fig. 20-23, C).
Slightly round any sharp external corners to strengthen
them and reduce the problems they may generate in future steps (see Fig. 20-22, J and K).
Cusp reduction appreciably decreases retention form because of decreasing the height of the vertical walls; consequently, proximal retention grooves usually are recommended (see Fig. 20-22, I). It may be necessary to

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG . 20-22 A, When extension of occlusal margin is one half the distance from any point on primary grooves (cross) toward cusp tip (dot), capping the cusp should be considered; when this
distance is two thirds or more, capping the cusp is usually indicated. B, I' is midway between
central groove and lingual cusp tip. f' is midway between central groove and facial cusp tip.
When enamel at 1 and f is undermined by caries, respective walls must be extended to dotted
li nes I' and f' for caries to be uncovered. Then cusps should be reduced for capping. C, Extension to uncover caries indicates that mesiolingual cusp should be reduced for capping. D, Depth
cuts. E, Reduced mesiolingual cusp. Note that caries has been removed and cement base has
been placed. F, Applying bur vertically helps establish vertical wall that barely includes lingual
groove. G, Counterbeveling reduced cusp. H, Section of counterbevel. I, Improving retention
form by cutting proximal retention grooves. Preparation is complete except for rounding axi opulpal line angle (J) and rounding junction of counterbevel and secondary flare (K). Facial surface groove extension improves both retention and resistance forms. L, Preparation when reducing one of two facial cusps on mandibular molar.

CHAPTER 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG . 20-23 A and B, Capping one of two facial cusps on maxillary molar. C, Blunting margin of
reduced cusp when esthetics is major consideration. D to F, Margin shown crossing distal cusp
i n D indicates treatment illustrated in either E or F.

increase retention form by extending facial and lingual
groove regions of the respective surfaces, or by collar
and skirt features presented in the later section. These
additional retention features also provide the desired resistance form against forces tending to split the tooth
(see Fig. 20-22, K; see also Fig. 20-28).
The principles stated in the preceding paragraphs
may be applied in the treatment of the distal cusp of the
mandibular first molar when preparing a MOD preparation (see Fig. 20-23, D). Proper extension of the distofacial margin usually places the occlusal margin in a region subjected to heavy masticatory forces and wear.
Satisfactory treatment usually dictates either (1) extending the distofacial margin (and wall) slightly mesial of
the distofacial groove (see Fig. 20-23, E) or (2) capping
the remaining portion of the distal cusp (see Fig. 20-23, F).
After cusp reduction, visually verify that the occlusal
clearances are sufficient. A wax interocclusal record is
helpful when checking occlusal clearances, especially in
areas difficult to visualize, such as in the central groove/
lingual cusp regions. To make a wax "bite," first dry the

preparation(s) free of visible moisture; do not, however,
desiccate the dentin (Fig. 20-24, A). Next lightly press a
portion of softened, low-fusing inlay wax over the prepared tooth (teeth); then immediately request the patient
to close into the soft wax and slide the teeth in all directions (see Fig. 20-24, B through F). During the mandibular movements, observe to verify that (1) the patient
moves in right lateral, left lateral, and protrusive movements; (2) the adjacent unprepared teeth are in contact
with the opposing teeth; (3) the wax in the preparation
is stable (not loose and rocking); and (4) the wax is not
in infraocclusion. Now cool and carefully remove the
wax. Hold it up to a light, and note the degree of light
transmitted. With experience, this is a good indicator of
the thickness of the wax. An alternative method is to use
wax calipers, or to section the wax to verify its thickness. Insufficient thickness calls for more reduction in
the indicated area before proceeding.
Including Portions of the Facial and Lingual
Smooth Surfaces Affected by Caries or Other Injury.
When portions of both a facial (lingual) smooth surface

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG . 20-24 Verifying sufficient cusp reduction by forming wax interocclusal record. A,
Walls of preparations (DO for second premolar and mesioocclusodistal for first mol ar) are dried of visible moisture by air. Low-fusing inlay wax that is the same length
as mesiodistal length of inlay preparations is softened and pressed over prepared
teeth. Patient moves mandible into all occlusal positions, left lateral (B), through MI
(C), to right lateral (D) and protrusive (E). F, Completed interocclusal record.

and a proximal surface are affected by caries or some
other factor (e.g., fracture) (Fig. 20-25, A and I), the treatment may be a large inlay, an onlay, a three-quarter
crown, a full crown, or multiple amalgam or composite
restorations. Generally, if carious portions are extensive,
the choice between the previously listed cast metal
restorations is determined by the degree of tooth circumference involved. A full crown is indicated if both
the lingual and facial smooth surfaces are defective, especially if the tooth is a second or third molar. When
only a portion of the facial smooth surface is carious and
the lingual surfaces of the teeth are conspicuously free
of caries, an MODFL inlay or onlay with a lingual
groove extension is chosen over the crown because the
former is more favorable to the health of the gingival tissues and more conservative in the removal of tooth
structure. Often this is the treatment choice for the maxillary second molar, which may exhibit caries or decalcification on the distofacial surface as a result of poor
oral hygiene (due to poor access) in this region (see
Fig. 20-25).
In the preparation of the maxillary molar referred to
in the preceding paragraph, usually the mesiofacial and
distolingual cusps, as well as the distofacial cusp, are reduced for capping. If the distofacial cusp defect is primarily shallow decalcification, the flame-shaped diamond instrument is used to both reduce the involved
facial surface and distofacial corner approximately the
depth of the enamel and to establish the gingival mar-

gin of this reduction apical to the affected area (see Fig.
20-25, D). This instrument also is used to terminate the
facial surface reduction in a definite facial margin running gingivoocclusally and in a manner to provide for
40-degree metal at this margin (see Fig. 20-25, E).
If the distofacial defect is more extensive and deeper
into the tooth (see Fig. 20-25, I), thereby eliminating the
opportunity for an effective distal box or groove (no facial wall possible), then the No. 271 carbide bur should
be used to cut a gingival shoulder extending from the
distal gingival floor around to include the affected facial
surface. This shoulder partially provides the desired resistance form. (A gingival floor, perpendicular to occlusal force, has been provided in lieu of the missing
pulpal wall in the distofacial cusp region.) Use the No.
271 bur to also create a nearly vertical wall in the remaining facial enamel (see Fig. 20-25, J). The width of
the shoulder should be the diameter of the end of the
cutting instrument. The vertical walls should have the
appropriate degree of draft to contribute to retention
form. Then the faciogingival and facial margins are
beveled with the flame-shaped, fine-grit diamond instrument to provide 30-degree metal at the gingival
margin (see Fig. 20-25, K) and 40-degree metal along the
facial margin (see Fig. 20-25, L). These two bevels
should blend together (see x in Fig. 20-25, M), and the
faciogingival bevel should be continuous with the gingival bevel on the distal surface. Additional retention
and resistance form is indicated for this preparation and

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

can be developed by an arbitrary lingual groove extension (see Fig. 20-25, N), or a distolingual skirt extension
(see Fig. 20-25, O and P). These preparation features resist forces normally opposed by the missing distofacial
wall and help protect the restored tooth from fracture
injury.
TOOTH PREPARATION FOR CAST
METAL ONLAYS
The preceding sections have presented basic tooth
preparation principles and techniques for small, simple
cast metal inlays. This section presents the tooth preparation principles and techniques for larger, more complex cast metal onlay restorations. Onlay and larger inlay restorations have many clinical applications and
may be desirable by many patients. Although not esthetic, these restorations have a well-deserved reputation for providing the finest dental treatment.
The cast metal onlay restoration spans the gap between the inlay, which is primarily an intracoronal
restoration, and the full crown, which is a totally extracoronal restoration. The cast metal onlay by definition caps
all of the cusps of a posterior tooth and can be designed to help
strengthen a tooth that has been weakened by caries or previous restorative experiences. It can be designed to distribute

occlusal loads over the tooth in a manner that greatly
decreases the chance of future fracture. It is more conservative of tooth structure than the full crown preparation and its supragingival margins, when possible, are
less irritating to the gingiva. Usually an onlay diagnosis
is made preoperatively because of the tooth's status.
However, sometimes the diagnosis is deferred until extension of the occlusal step of an inlay preparation facially and lingually to the limits of the carious lesion
demonstrates that cusp reduction is mandatory.
The mandibular first molar is used to illustrate one
MOD preparation for a cast metal onlay; other onlay
preparations are presented subsequently.
I nitial Preparation
Occlusal Reduction. As soon as the decision is made to
restore the tooth with a cast metal onlay, the cusps should be
reduced because this improves both the access and the visibility for subsequent steps in tooth preparation. With the

cusps reduced, the efficiency of both the cutting instrument and the air-water cooling spray is improved.
Also, once the cusps are reduced, it is easier to assess
the height of the remaining clinical crown of the tooth,
which determines the degree of occlusal divergence
necessary for adequate retention form. Using the
No. 271 carbide bur held parallel to the long axis of the
tooth crown, prepare a 2-mm deep pulpal floor along
the central groove (Fig. 20-26, A). To verify the preoperative diagnosis for cusp reduction, this occlusal
preparation may be extended facially and lingually just
beyond the caries to sound tooth structure (see Fig. 2026, B). However, the groove should not be extended farther than two thirds the distance from the central

groove to the cusp tips because the need for cusp reduction is verified at this point. With the side of the
No. 271 carbide bur, prepare uniform 1.5 mm deep depth
cuts on the remaining occlusal surface (see Fig. 20-26, C
and D). The depth cuts are usually placed on the crest of
the triangular ridges and in the facial and lingual groove
regions. These depth cuts will help prevent thin spots in
the final restoration. It should be remembered that if a
cusp is in infraocclusion of the desired occlusal plane before reduction, then the amount of cusp reduction is less
and needs only that which provides the required clearance with the desired occlusal plane. Caries and old
restorative material that is deeper in the tooth than the desired
clearance is not removed at this step in preparation.

With the depth cuts serving as guides for the amount
of reduction, complete the cusp reduction with the side
of the No. 271 bur. This reduction, when completed,
should reflect the general topography of the original occlusal surface (see Fig. 20-26, E). Do not attempt to completely reduce the mesial and distal marginal ridges at
this time to avoid possibly hitting an adjacent tooth. The
remainder of the ridges will be reduced in a later step
when the proximal boxes are prepared.
Throughout the next steps in initial preparation, the
cutting instruments used to develop the vertical walls
are oriented continually to a single "draw" path, usually the long axis of the tooth crown, so that the completed preparation will have draft (i.e., no undercuts).
For mandibular molars and second premolars whose
crowns tilt slightly lingually, the bur should tilt slightly
(5 to 10 degrees) lingually to help preserve the strength
of the lingual cusps (see Fig. 20-4, D). The gingival-toocclusal divergence of these preparation walls may
range from 2 to 5 degrees from the line of draw, depending on their height. If the vertical walls are unusually short, a minimum of 2 degrees occlusal divergence
is desirable for retentive purposes. Cusp reduction appreciably decreases retention form because of decreasing the height of the vertical walls, so this minimal
amount of divergence is often indicated in the preparation of a tooth for a cast metal onlay. As the gingivoocclusal height of the vertical walls increases, the occlusal
divergence should increase, allowing as much as 5 degrees in the preparation of greatest gingivoocclusal
length. The latter preparations present difficulties during pattern withdrawal, trial seating and withdrawal of
the casting, and cementing unless this maximal divergence is provided.
Occlusal Step. After cusp reduction there should be
a 0.5 mm deep occlusal step in the central groove region
between the reduced cuspal inclines and the pulpal
floor. Maintaining the pulpal depth (0.5 mm) of the step,
extend it facially and lingually just beyond any carious
areas, to sound tooth structure (or to sound base/
restorative material if certain conditions, discussed subsequently, have been met). Extend mesially and distally
far enough to expose the proximal DEJ (see Fig. 20-26, F).

C H A P T E R 20

Class ii Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-25 A, Maxillary molar with caries on both distofacial corner and mesial surface. Completed MODFL inlay for treating caries shown in A, facioocclusal view (B) and distolinguoocclusal view (C). Preparation for treating caries illustrated in A, DO view with diamond instrument
being applied (D); occlusal view (E); distal view (F); distolinguoocclusal view (G); MO view (H).
1, Maxillary molar with deeper caries on distofacial corner and with mesial caries. J, Preparation
( minus bevels and flares) for MODFL inlay to restore carious molar shown in I. No. 271 carbide
bur is used to prepare gingival shoulder and vertical wall. K and L, Beveling margins. M and N,
Completed preparation for treating caries shown in I. Gingival and facial bevels blend at x, and
y is cement base. O and P, When lingual surface groove has not been prepared and when facial
wall of proximal boxing is mostly or totally missing, forces directed to displace inlay facially can
be opposed by lingual skirt extension (z).

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

20-26 A, Cutting 2 mm deep along central groove. B, Extendi ng central groove cut facially and lingually to verify need for cusp
capping. C, Depth cuts. D, Section of C. E, Completing cusp reduction. Note that small portions of mesial and distal marginal ridges
are left unreduced to avoid scarring adjacent teeth. F, Occlusal step
i s extended facially and lingually past any carious areas and is extended to expose proximal DEJs (j) in anticipation of proximal boxi ng. G, Preparation with proximal boxes prepared. Note clearances
with adjacent teeth.
FIG.

Extend the step along any remaining facial (and lingual)
occlusal fissures as far as they are faulty (fissured). The
facial and lingual walls of the occlusal step should go
around the cusps in graceful curves, and the isthmus
should only be as wide as necessary to be in sound tooth
structure or sound base/ restorative material. Old
restorative material or caries that is deeper pulpally
than this 0.5-mm step is not removed at this stage of
tooth preparation.

As the occlusal step approaches the mesial and distal
surfaces, it should widen faciolingually in anticipation
for the proximal box extensions (see Fig. 20-26, F). This
0.5-mm occlusal step will contribute to the retention of
the restoration" and will provide the wax pattern and
cast metal onlay with additional bulk for rigidity.
Proximal Box. Continuing with the No. 271 carbide
bur held parallel to the long axis of the tooth crown, prepare the proximal boxes as described in the inlay sec-

CHAPTER 20

tion. Fig. 20-26, G, illustrates the preparation after the
proximal boxes are prepared.
Final Preparation
Removal of Infected Carious Dentin and Defective
Restorative Materials and Pulp Protection. If the occlusal step and the proximal boxes have been extended
properly, any caries or previous restorative materials remaining on the pulpal and axial walls should be visible.
Remove them as described previously.
Preparation of Bevels and Flares. After the cement
base (when indicated) is completed (Fig. 20-27, A), use
the slender, flame-shaped, fine-grit diamond instrument
to place counterbevels on the reduced cusps, to apply the
gingival bevels, and to create secondary flares on the facial
and lingual walls of the proximal boxes. First insert a
gingival retraction cord as described in the previous inlay
section. During the few minutes required for the cord's
effect on the gingival tissues, use the diamond instrument for preparing the counterbevels on the facial and
lingual margins of the reduced cusps. The bevel should
be of generous width and should result in 30-degree
marginal metal. The best way to judge this is to always
maintain a 30-degree angle between the side of the instrument and the external enamel surface beyond the
counterbevel (see Fig. 20-27, B and C). The counterbevel
should usually be wide enough so that the cavosurface
margin is beyond (gingival to) any contact with the opposing dentition.
If a facial (lingual) surface fissure extends slightly beyond the normal position of the counterbevel, it may be
included (removed) by deepening the counterbevel in
the region of the fissure (see Fig. 20-27, D). However, if
the fissure extends gingivally more than 0.5 mm, then
manage the fissure as described later.
A counterbevel is not placed on the facial cusps of maxillary
premolars and first molars where esthetic considerations may
dictate using a stubbed margin by blunting and smoothing of
the enamel margin by either the light application of a finegrit sandpaper disc or the fine-grit diamond instrument
(flame-shaped) held at a right angle to the facial surface
(see Fig. 20-23, C). The surface created by this blunting
should be approximately 0.5 mm in width.
For beveling the gingival margins and flaring (secondary) the proximal enamel walls, refer to the inlay
section.
After beveling and flaring, slightly round any sharp
junctions between the counterbevels and the secondary
flares (see Fig. 20-27, E). The fine-grit diamond instrument also is used to lightly bevel the axiopulpal line angles (see Fig. 20-27, F). Such a bevel produces a stronger
wax pattern at this critical region by increasing its thickness. Slightly round any sharp projecting corners in the
preparation because these projections are difficult to reproduce without voids when developing the working
cast and often cause difficulties when seating the casting. The desirable metal angle at the margins of onlays

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

is 40 degrees, except at the gingivally directed margins,
where the metal angle should be 30 degrees.
When deemed necessary, shallow (0.3 mm deep) retention grooves may be cut in the facioaxial and the linguoaxial line angles with the No. 169L carbide bur (see
Fig. 20-27, G). These grooves are especially important
for retention when the prepared tooth is short, which is
often the case after reducing all the cusps. When properly positioned, the grooves are entirely in dentin near
the DEJ and therefore do not undermine the enamel.
The direction of cutting (translation of the bur) is parallel to the DEJ. The long axis of the No. 169L bur must be
held parallel to the line of draw and the tip of the bur
positioned in the gingival box internal point angles.
However, if the axial walls are deeper than ideal, the
correct reference for placing retention grooves is just inside the DEJ to minimize pulpal impacts yet avoid undermining enamel.
The model showing the completed preparation is illustrated in Fig. 20-27, H.
Modifications in Onlay Tooth Preparations
Facial or Lingual Surface Groove Extension. A facial surface fissure (mandibular molar) or a lingual surface fissure (maxillary molar) is included in the outline
in the same manner as described in the inlay section.
This extension is sometimes indicated to provide additional
retention form even though the groove is not faulty. A completed MODF onlay preparation on a mandibular first
molar is illustrated in Fig. 20-27, I.
Inclusion of Portions of the Facial and Lingual
Smooth Surfaces Affected by Caries, Fractured
Cusps, or Other Injury. For inclusion of shallow to
moderate lesions on the facial and lingual smooth surfaces, refer to the inlay section.
A mandibular molar with a fractured mesiolingual
cusp is used to illustrate the treatment of a fractured
cusp of a molar (Fig. 20-28, A). Use a No. 271 carbide bur
to cut a shoulder perpendicular to occlusal force by extending the proximal gingival floor (adjacent to the fracture) to include the affected surface. This shoulder partially provides the desired resistance form by being
perpendicular to gingivally directed occlusal force. Use
this instrument also to create a vertical wall in the remaining lingual enamel (see Fig. 20-28, B). The width of
the gingival floor should be the diameter of the end of
the cutting instrument. The vertical walls should have
the degree of draft necessary for retention form. If the
clinical crown of the tooth is short, it is advisable to cut
proximal grooves for additional retention with the No.
169L bur. The linguogingival and lingual margins are
beveled with the flame-shaped, fine-grit diamond instrument to provide 30-degree metal at the gingival
margin (see Fig. 20-28, C) and 40-degree metal along the
lingual margin (see Fig. 20-28, D). These two bevels
should blend together (x in Fig. 20-28, E), and the linguogingival bevel is continuous with the gingival bevel

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-27 A, Caries has been removed, and cement base has been inserted. B, Counterbeveli ng facial and lingual margins of reduced cusps. C, Section of B. D, Fissure that extends slightly
gingival to normal position of counterbevel may be included by slightly deepening counterbevel
i n fissured area. E, Slightly round the junctions between counterbevels and secondary flares. F,
Lightly bevel axiopulpal line angle. G, Improving retention form by cutting proximal grooves. H,
Completed MOD onlay preparation. I, Completed MODE onlay preparation showing extension
to include facial surface groove/fissure.

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG

20-28 A, Mandibular first molar with large MOD amalgam and fractured mesiolingual
cusp. B, Preparation (minus bevels and flares) for MODFL onlay to restore fractured molar
shown in A. No. 271 carbide bur is used to prepare gingival shoulder and vertical lingual
wall. Reducing cusps for capping and extending out facial groove improve retention and resistance forms. C and D, Beveling margins. E and F, Completed preparation. Gingival and
lingual bevels blend at x and y is cement base. G and H, Completed onlay.

on the mesial surface. Additional features to improve retention and resistance forms are indicated and can be
developed by a mesiofacial skirt extension or by a facial
groove extension. These preparation features, discussed
in the following section: (1) improve retention form and
(2) resist forces normally opposed by the missing mesiolingual wall, and (3) help protect the restored tooth
from further fracture injury.
Enhancement of Resistance and Retention Forms.

When the tooth crown is short (which is often the case
when all cusps are reduced), the operator must strive to
maximize retention form in the preparation. Retention
features that have already been presented include:
1. Minimal amount of taper (2 degrees per wall) on the
vertical walls of the preparation
2. Addition of proximal retention grooves
3. Preparation of facial (or lingual) surface groove
extensions
In the preparation of a tooth that has been grossly
weakened by caries or previous filling material and is
judged to be prone to fracture under occlusal loads, the
resistance form that cusp capping provides should be
augmented by the use of skirts, collars, or facial (lin-

gual) surface groove extensions. When properly placed,
these features result in onlays that will distribute occlusal forces over most or all of the tooth and not just a
portion of it, thus reducing the likelihood of fractures of
the teeth, as depicted in Fig. 20-29, A and B. The lingual
"skirt" extension(s) (see Fig. 20-29, C through E), the lingual "collar" preparation (see Fig. 20-29, F), or the lingual surface groove extension on a maxillary molar protect the facial cusps from fracture. The facial skirt
extension(s), the facial collar preparation, or the facial
surface groove extension on a mandibular molar protect
the lingual cusp(s) from fracture.
Skirt preparation. Skirts are thin extensions of the
facial or lingual proximal margins of the cast metal
onlay that extend from the primary flare to a termination just past the transitional line angle of the tooth.
A skirt extension is a conservative method of improving
both the retention form and the resistance form of
the preparation. It is relatively atraumatic to the health
of the tooth because it involves removing very little
(if any) dentin. Usually the skirt extensions are prepared
entirely in enamel.
When the proximal portion of a Class II preparation
for an onlay is being prepared and the lingual wall is
partially or totally missing, retention form normally

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

20-29
Large cement base x indicates severely weakened tooth crown. Occlusal force (heavy arrow) may fracture facial cusp (A) or lingual cusp (B), which
may expose pulp (p). C and D, Skirt extensions (s) on mesiolingual, distolingual,
and distofacial transitional line angles prevent fractures shown in A and B. Esthetic
consideration contraindicates skirting mesiofacial line angle. E, Distal view of
preparation shown in D. Skirt extensions are prepared with fine-grit diamond instrument. F, Collar preparation around lingual cusp prevents fracture shown in A.
fIG

provided by this wall can be developed with a skirt extension of the facial margin (Fig. 20-30, A through C).
Similarly, if the facial wall is not retentive, a skirt extension of the lingual margin will supply the desired retention form (see Fig. 20-25, O and P). When both the
lingual and facial walls of a proximal boxing are inadequate, skirt extensions on both the respective lingual
and facial margins can satisfy retention and resistance
form requirements. The addition of properly prepared skirts
to three offour line angles of the tooth virtually eliminates the
chance of postrestorative fracture of the tooth because the
skirting onlay is primarily an extracoronal restoration that
encompasses and braces the tooth against forces that might
otherwise split the tooth. The skirting onlay is often used
successfully for many teeth that exhibit the split-tooth
syndrome.
The addition of skirt extensions also is recommended
when the proximal surface contour and contact are to be
extended more than the normal dimension to develop a
proximal contact. Extending these proximal margins
onto the respective facial and lingual surfaces aids in recontouring the proximal surface to this increased dimension. Also, when improving the occlusal plane of a
mesially tilted molar by a cusp capping onlay, reshaping
the mesial surface to a satisfactory contour and contact
is aided when the mesiofacial and mesiolingual margins
are extended generously.
Skirting also is recommended when splinting posterior teeth together with onlays. The added retention and
resistance form is very desirable because of the increased stress on each unit. Because the facial and lingual proximal margins are extended generously, the

ease of soldering the connector(s) and finishing of the
proximal margins is increased.
A disadvantage of skirting is that it increases the display of metal on the facial and lingual surfaces of the
tooth. For this reason, skirts are not placed on the mesiofacial margin of maxillary premolars and first molars.
Skirting the remaining three line angles of the tooth provides ample retention and resistance form.
The preparation of a skirt is done entirely with the
slender, flame-shaped, fine-grit diamond instrument.
Skirt preparations follow the completion of the proximal gingival bevel and primary flares. However, experienced operators will often prepare the skirt extensions at the same time that the gingival bevel is
placed, working from the lingual toward the facial or
vice versa. Maintaining the long axis of the instrument
parallel to the line of draw, translate the rotating instrument into the tooth to create a definite vertical
margin, just beyond the line angle of the tooth, providing at the same time a 140-degree cavosurface
enamel angle (40-degree metal angle) (see Fig. 20-30,
D through F). The occlusogingival length of this entrance cut varies, depending on the length of the clinical crown and the amount of extracoronal retention
and resistance forms desired. Extending into the gingival third of the anatomic crown is usually necessary for effective resistance form. Note that in most instances, the
gingival margin of the skirt extension is occlusal to the
position of the gingival bevel of the proximal box (see
Fig. 20-30, H and L).
Use less than one half the tip diameter of the flameshaped diamond instrument to avoid creating a ledge at

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG . 20-30 A, When lingual wall of proximal boxing is inadequate or missing, retention form
can be improved by facial skirt extension (x). B, Facioocclusal view of A. Maximal resistance
form is developed by skirting distofacial (y) and mesiofacial (x) transitional line angles. C, Occlusal view of B. D through F, Initial cut for skirt is placed just past transitional line angle of tooth.
G and H, Blending skirt into primary flare.
Continued
the gingival margin of the skirt extension. Using high
speed and maintaining the long axis of the diamond instrument parallel with the line of draw, translate the instrument from the entrance cut toward the proximal box
to blend the skirt into the primary flare and the proximal gingival margin (see Fig. 20-30, G and H). Be sure not
to overreduce the line angle of the tooth when preparing skirt
extensions (see x in Fig. 20-30, I and K). If the line angle
of the tooth is overreduced, the bracing effect of the skirt
will be diminished.
Holding the diamond instrument at the same angle
that was used for preparing the counterbevel, round the
j unction between the skirt and the counterbevel (see Fig.

20-30, J). Be sure to slightly round any sharp angles that
remain after preparation of the skirt because these often
lead to difficulties in subsequent steps of completing the
restoration.
Collar preparation. To increase the retention and
resistance forms when preparing a weakened tooth for
a MOD onlay capping all cusps, a facial or lingual
"collar," or both, may be provided (Fig. 20-31). To reduce the display of metal, however, facial surfaces of
maxillary premolars and first molars are not usually
prepared for a collar.
Use a No. 271 carbide bur at high speed parallel to the
line of draw to prepare a 0.8-mm deep shoulder (equivalent

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG

20-30, cont'd G and H, Blending skirt into primary flare. I, Occlusal view showing mesiolingual and distolingual skirts. Caution is exercised to prevent overreduction of transitional line
angles (x). Facial surface groove extension also improves both retention and resistance forms.
J, Slightly round the junction of skirt and counterbevel. K, Skirting all four transitional line angles of tooth further enhances retention and resistance forms. Again, caution is exercised to prevent overreduction of transitional line angles (x). L, Mesial and facial views of preparation
shown in K.

FIG. 20-31 A, First position of bur in preparing for
l i ngual collar on weakened maxillary premolar.
Section drawings of first position of bur (13) and
second and third positions (C). D, Beveling lingual
margin. Note distofacial skirt extension. E, Completed preparation. F, Completed onlay.

CHAPTER

to the diameter of the tip end of the bur) around the lingual
(or facial) surface to provide for a collar about 2 to 3 mm
high occlusogingivally (see Fig. 20-31, A and B). To provide
for a uniform thickness of metal, the occlusal 1 mm of this
reduction should be prepared to follow the original contour
of the tooth (see Fig. 20-31, C) and should round any undesirable sharp line angle formed by the union of the prepared lingual and occlusal surfaces. Complete this aspect of
the preparation by lightly beveling the gingival margin of
the shoulder with the flame-shaped, fine-grit diamond instrument to result in a 30-degree metal angle at the margin
(see Fig. 20-31, D).
Slot preparation. Occasionally the use of a slot in the
dentin is helpful to provide the necessary retention
form. An example is the mandibular second molar that
has no molar posterior to it and requires a MO onlay
restoration capping all of the cusps (Fig. 20-32, A
through C). The distal, facial, and lingual surfaces are
free of caries or other injury, and these surfaces also are
j udged not to be prone to caries. After cusp reduction,
the vertical walls of the occlusal step portion of the
preparation have been reduced so as to provide very little retention form. The necessary retention can be
achieved by cutting a distal slot. Such a slot is preferred
over preparing a box in the distal surface because:
(1) the former is more conserving of tooth structure and
of strength of the tooth crown and (2) the linear extent
of marginal outline is less.
To form this slot, use a No. 169L carbide bur whose
long axis should parallel the line of draw (this must be
reasonably close to a line parallel with the long axis of
the tooth) (see Fig. 20-32, A). The slot is cut in dentin so

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

that if it were to be extended gingivally, it would pass
midway between the pulp and the DEJ (see Fig. 20-32, C).
Such a position and direction of the slot averts: (1) exposure of the pulp, (2) removal of the dentin supporting
the distal enamel, and (3) perforation of the distal surface of the tooth at the gingival termination of the slot.
The slot should have the following approximate dimensions: (1) mesiodistally, the width (diameter) of the bur;
(2) faciolingually, 2 mm; and (3) depth, 2 mm gingival of
the normally positioned pulpal wall. To be effective, the
mesial wall of the slot must be in sound dentin; otherwise insufficient retention form will be obtained.
A comparable situation occasionally occurs in which
the maxillary first premolar requires a DO onlay restoration capping the cusps, and the mesial surface is noncarious and judged not prone to caries (see Fig. 20-32, D
through F). To reduce metal display and to conserve
tooth structure, a slot similar to that described in the
preceding paragraph, except that it is mesially positioned and 1.5 mm wide faciolingually, may be used for
the production of adequate retention. The mesial occlusal marginal outline in this preparation should be
distal of the height of the mesial marginal ridge.
Modifications for Esthetics on Maxillary Premolars
and First Molars. To minimize the display of metal on
maxillary premolars and first molars, several modifications for esthetics are made to the basic onlay preparation. On the facial cusps of maxillary premolars and on
the mesiofacial cusp of the maxillary first molar, the occlusal reduction should only be 0.75 to 1 mm on the facial cusp ridge to decrease the display of metal. This
thickness should increase progressively to 1.5 mm

FIG. 20-32

A and B, Cutting distal slot for retention for MO onlay to treat terminal molar
having large cement base (x) resulting from
extensive occlusal and mesial caries. C, Section of A. D and E, Preparing mesial slot for retention for DO onlay to treat maxillary first
premolar that has large cement base (x).
F, Section of D.

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-33 A, Mandibular second and third molars tilted mesially, often the result of failure to

replace lost first molar by bridgework. Note poor contact relationship between molars and between molar and second premolar. B, Second premolar is prepared for inlay, and molars are
prepared for onlays. Margins of preparations are well extended on facial and lingual surfaces to
aid in recontouring teeth to improve occlusal relationship and to improve proximal contours
and contacts. C, Completed restorations. Note improvement both in occlusal plane and in proxi mal contacts.

toward the center of the tooth to help provide rigidity to
the capping metal. Furthermore, these cusps do not receive a counterbevel but are "stubbed" or blunted by
the application of a sandpaper disc or the fine-grit diamond instrument held at a right angle to the facial surface (see Fig. 20-23, C). The surface created by this blunting should be approximately 0.5 mm in width.
To further decrease the display of metal on maxillary
premolars and first molars, the mesiofacial margin is
minimally extended facially of contact to such a position
that the margin is barely visible from a facial viewing
position. To accomplish this, the secondary flare is omitted, and the wall and margin are developed with a
chisel or enamel hatchet. Final smoothing with the finegrit paper disc is recommended when access permits.
The cavosurface margin should result in a gold angle of
40 to 50 degrees, if possible.
When more than ideal extension of the mesiofacial
margin is necessary because of caries or previous
restorations and when the esthetic desires of the patient
dictate, the operator may choose to place a composite insert at this margin. This is a more conservative option
than preparing the tooth to receive a porcelain-veneered
metal crown. When preparing the mesiofacial margin,
no attempt is made to develop a straight mesiofacial wall
past the point of ideal extension. After caries excavation
a glass-ionomer cement base is inserted to temporarily
form the missing portion of the wall. The cement is contoured to ideal form, and the preparation can continue,
terminating the mesiofacial onlay margin in ideal position in the cement. Following cementation, remove (with
small round burs) the glass-ionomer cement to a depth
of 1 mm for a composite insert. Small undercuts should
be prepared in the wall formed by the cast metal onlay
(see Fig. 20-68, A). (It is best to carve the undercut in the
wall formed by the onlay during the wax pattern stage.)
After beveling the enamel cavosurface margin and

preparing a gingival retention groove where, and if,
enamel is thin or missing, insert the composite veneer
(see Fig. 20-71, A).
Routinely, teeth that
have had endodontic treatment are weak and subject to
fracture from occlusal forces. These teeth require
restorations designed to provide protection from this
injury (see Fig. 20-30, K and L). This particularly applies
to the posterior teeth, which receive greater stress. The
need for such protection is accentuated when much of
the strength of the tooth has been lost because of extensive caries or previous restorations. When the facial
and lingual surfaces of an endodontically treated tooth
are sound, it is more conservative for the health of the
facial and lingual gingival tissues not to prepare the
tooth for a full crown but for a MOD onlay that has
been designed with adequate resistance form to prevent future tooth fracture. Such features include skirt
extensions and collar preparations. These features
make the onlay more of an extracoronal restoration that
encompasses the tooth, such that the tooth is better able
to resist lateral forces that might otherwise fracture the
tooth.
Before starting the preparation of an endodontically
treated molar, the pulp chamber should be excavated to
the chamber floor and sometimes into the canals (1 to
2 mm), and an amalgam foundation placed. This will
give the onlay a firm base on which to rest. In the preparation of an endodontically treated premolar for an onlay, the canal is usually prepared for a metal post, which
is placed in the canal before the onlay preparation is
completed. This post will help the tooth resist forces
that might otherwise cause a horizontal fracture of the
entire tooth crown from the root. The post should extend roughly two thirds the length of the root and
should terminate, leaving at least 3 mm of the root canal
filling material at the apical portion of the root.
Endodontically Treated Teeth.

CHAPTER 20

Restoring the Occlusal Plane of a Tilted Molar. An
onlay is excellent for restoring the occlusal plane of a
mesially tilted molar (Fig. 20-33). When the unprepared
occlusal surface (mesial portion) is less than the desired
occlusal plane, a corresponding decrease in occlusal surface reduction is indicated. To facilitate increasing the
height of the tooth and yet maintaining both the desirable faciolingual dimension of the restored occlusal surface and good contour of the facial and lingual surfaces,
the counterbevels on the latter surfaces often should be
extended gingivally more than usual (see Fig. 20-33, B).
Furthermore, often the mesiofacial and mesiolingual
margins (on the "submerged" proximal surface) should
be well extended onto the respective facial and lingual
surfaces to help in recontouring the mesial surface to
desirable proximal surface contour and contact. This extension can be accomplished with a minimal loss of
tooth structure by preparing facial and lingual skirt extensions on the respective proximal margins, which improves retention and resistance forms. In comparison,
achieving extension by preparing the mesiofacial and
mesiolingual walls facially and lingually, respectively,
does not improve retention or resistance forms and is
less conservative of tooth structure.
Verification of appropriate cusp reduction is the same
as presented for the inlay tooth preparation and is illustrated in Fig. 20-24.
RESTORATIVE TECHNIQUES
FOR CAST METAL RESTORATIONS
I NTEROCCLUSALRECORDS
Before preparation of the tooth, the occlusal contacts in
MI and in all lateral and protrusive movements should
have been carefully evaluated.
If the patient has sufficient canine guidance to provide disocclusion of the posterior teeth, then the necessary regis-

tration of the opposing teeth can be obtained by (1)
making a MI interocclusal record with commercially
available bite registration pastes or (2) making full-arch
impressions and mounting the casts made from these
impressions on a simple hinge articulator. The interocclusal record works well when preparing one tooth; the
full-arch casts are preferred when more than two prepared teeth are involved.
The MI interocclusal record can be made from one of
several commercially available bite registration pastes
with or without a disposable gauze-covered bite frame
(Fig. 20-34, A). The most commonly used bite registration pastes are composed of heavily filled silicone or
polyether impression materials. Several materials are
available in cartridge systems that automatically mix the
base and accelerator pastes together as they are expressed through a special disposable mixing tip. The
mixed impression material may be applied to both sides
of a gauze-covered bite frame (see Fig. 20-34, B). Usually

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

a layer 2 mm thick on both sides of the frame is sufficient. The frame is positioned over the maxillary teeth so
that no portion of the frame will interfere with closure,
and then the patient closes completely (see Fig. 20-34, C).
Observe teeth not covered by the bite registration paste
to verify that the teeth are in MI. Once the material has
set, remove the interocclusal record from the teeth and
inspect it for completeness (see Fig. 20-34, D). When held
up to a light, there should be areas where the adjacent
unprepared teeth have penetrated through the material.
With some systems, the gauze frame is optional. The bite
impression material can be dispensed directly onto the
prepared teeth as well as their opponents, and then have
the patient close into MI. The interocclusal record is set
aside for later use in the laboratory.
The MI interocclusal records described in the previous
paragraph provide information on the shape and position of the opposing teeth in MI. Such records give the
laboratory technician some information on how to form
the occlusal surface and position occlusal contacts on the
restoration, but supply no data on how these structures
and contacts might function during mandibular movements. This is also true when full-arch casts are mounted
on a simple hinge articulator. Cast metal restorations
made with these simple bite registration techniques often require adjustments in the mouth to alleviate interferences during mandibular movements.
If information is desired in the laboratory about the
pathways of cusps during mandibular movements
(such as when the tooth is to be restored in group function), an excellent technique involves making full-arch
i mpressions and mounting casts made from these impressions on a properly adjusted semiadjustable articulator (Fig. 20-35).
The use of full-arch casts mounted on a semiadjustable articulator is recommended when restoring a large portion of
the patient's posterior occlusion with cast metal restorations.

It involves very little extra chair time and gives the laboratory technician much more information about the
general occlusal scheme, pathways of cusps, opposing
cusp steepness and groove direction, and the anatomy
of the other teeth in the mouth. The technique uses a
full-arch tray when making the final impression, which
requires mixing more material, especially when using
stock trays. The opposing arch is impressed with alginate impression material, and the appropriate mandibular movement and face-bow transfer records are made.
The reader is referred to Chapter 2 for principles regarding the use of the semiadjustable articulator in developing proper occlusal relationships for cast metal
restorations.
TEMPORARY RESTORATION
Between the time the tooth is prepared and the cast
metal restoration is delivered, it is important that the
patient be comfortable and the tooth be protected and

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

stabilized with an adequate temporary restoration. The
temporary restoration should satisfy the following
requirements:
1.

It should be nonirritating and protect the prepared
tooth from injury.
2. It should protect and maintain the health of the periodontium.
3. It should maintain the position of the prepared, adj acent, and opposing teeth.
4. It should provide for esthetic, phonetic, and masticatory function as indicated.
5. It should have adequate strength and retention to
withstand the forces to which it will be subjected.
When properly made, the custom temporary can satisfy the above requirements and is the preferred temporary restoration. Temporaries can be fabricated intraorally directly on the prepared teeth (direct technique) or

FIG. 20-34

outside of the mouth using a postoperative cast of the
prepared teeth (indirect technique). The indirect technique is not as popular because of increased number of
steps and complexity; however, it is useful when making temporaries that might become "locked on" (e.g., intracoronal inlays) when using the direct technique.
Technique for Indirect Temporary. The indirect temporary technique has the following advantages:
1.

At one time it was shown that the marginal accuracy of indirect resin temporaries was significantly
better than that of temporaries made by the direct
technique.' However, current direct techniques and
materials provide acceptable marginal accuracy and
are much faster. Accurate marginal fit is desirable to
prevent cement washout and pulpal irritation due
to penetration of oral fluids and bacteria. Good marginal fit also promotes good oral hygiene and periodontal health.

MI interocclusal record made with polyvinyl siloxane bite registration paste. A, One
of many commercially available bite registration pastes and gauze-covered bite frame used in
this technique. B, Using cartridge dispenser and disposable automixing tip, the base and accelerator pastes are automatically mixed and applied to both sides of bite frame (2 mm thick on
each side). C, Seeing that no portion of bite frame interferes with closure, have patient close into
MI position. Be sure that adjacent, unprepared teeth are touching in their normal relationships.
D, Remove MI interocclusal record carefully after it has set, and inspect it for completeness.
There should be areas where adjacent, unprepared teeth have penetrated through paste.

CHAPTER

2.

3.

The indirect technique avoids the possibility of
"locking on" the set temporary material into undercuts on the prepared tooth or the adjacent teeth.
The indirect technique avoids placing polymerizing
temporary material directly on freshly prepared
dentin and investing soft tissue, thus reducing potential irritation to these tissues
The postoperative cast made in the indirect technique affords an opportunity to evaluate the prepa.6,8,10

4.

FIG. 20-35 Full-arch casts mounted via a facebow transfer on
a semiadjustable articulator provide maximal information in
the laboratory on how to position cusps to prevent undesirable contacts.

FIG

20

5.

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

ration (before the final impression) and serves as an
excellent guide when trimming and contouring the
temporary.
Fabrication of the temporary can be delegated to a
well-trained dental auxiliary.

To form the indirect temporary, first make an impression of the prepared tooth (teeth) with fast-setting impression material. Use a stock, plastic impression tray
that has been painted with tray adhesive (Fig. 20-36, A).
If using alginate, be sure that the teeth are slightly moist
with saliva, then apply some alginate over and into the
preparation(s) with a fingertip to avoid or minimize
trapping air (see Fig. 20-36, B); then seat the tray over
the region (see Fig. 20-36, C). After the material has become elastic, remove the impression with a quick pull in
the direction of draw of the preparation and inspect it
for completeness (see Fig. 20-36, D). Pour this impression with fast-setting plaster or stone (see Fig. 20-36, E).
As soon as the postoperative cast has been recovered
from the impression, inspect the cast for any negative or
positive defects (see Fig. 20-36, F). Small voids on the cast
may be filled in with utility wax. Large voids indicate repouring the impression. Positives (blebs) on the cast
should be carefully removed with a suitable instrument.
Seat the postoperative cast into the preoperative impression (Fig. 20-37, A through D). If using alginate, recall that the preoperative impression has been wrapped

20-36 Making a postoperative plaster cast for indirectly forming a temporary. A, Interior of
tray is coated with alginate tray adhesive. B, Apply some alginate over and into preparations
with fingertip to avoid trapping air. C, Alginate-filled tray in place. D, Alginate impression. E, Alginate impression is poured with fast-setting plaster. F, Plaster cast of preparations shown in Fig.
20-24, A.

840

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG .

20-37 Forming indirect temporaries for preparations initially shown in Fig. 20-24, A. A, Cut
away thin edges of preoperative impression material that record gingival sulcus because these
are apt to tear when seating postoperative cast in impression. B and C, Trimming away much of
the soft tissue areas recorded by impression and cast also facilitates seating. D, Trial seating the
postoperative cast into preoperative impression. E, Marking margins with red pencil. F, Applyi ng release agent to cast. G, Fill preoperative impression with temporary material in area of
tooth preparation. H, Seating cast into impression, taking care not to overseat or tilt cast.
I, Formed temporary.

in wet paper towels from the time it was made (see
Fig. 20-2, D). Cut away the thin edges of the postoperative alginate impression material that record the gingival sulcus (see Fig. 20-37, A). If these thin edges are not
removed, they may tear off and keep the postoperative
cast from seating completely in the impression. Trialseat the postoperative cast into the preoperative impression to verify that it seats completely. Soft tissue areas around the perimeter of the impression and/or the
cast may have to be relieved to allow full seating (see
Fig. 20-37, B and C).

Once satisfied that the gypsum cast seats completely
in the preoperative impression (see Fig. 20-37, D), remove the cast, and mark the margins of the preparations
on the cast with a red pencil to facilitate trimming (see
Fig. 20-37, E). Brush a release agent on the preparations
and adjacent teeth (see Fig. 20-37, F). Mix tooth-colored
temporary material (following the manufacturer's instructions) and flow into the preoperative impression in
the area of the prepared teeth (see Fig. 20-37, G). When
adjacent teeth are prepared, the temporary material is
continuous from one tooth to the next. Seat the cast into

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG . 20-38 Trimming and adjusting indirect temporaries. A, Trim excess material back to accessible facial and lingual margins (marked by red line on plaster cast). B, On multiple-unit temporaries, a slender bur or diamond instrument can be used to refine interproximal embrasure
form. C, On cast, cut away any tooth adjacent to temporary. D, Trimming proximal surface of
temporary to proper contour. Take care not to remove proximal contact (c). E and F, After final
i mpression is made, temporary is cemented with temporary cement. Note anatomic contour
and fit (E) and functional occlusion of temporary restoration (F).

the preoperative impression, making sure it seats completely (see Fig. 20-37, H). Do not apply too much pressure on the cast, or the temporary will be distorted and
too thin in some areas. When the cast is seated, wrap the
cast and the impression passively with a rubber band
(too much pressure from the rubber band can distort the
temporary), and submerge the assembly in hot water to
accelerate the setting reaction. The formed temporary is
shown in Fig. 20-37, I.
With suitable burs (No. 271, small acrylic bur, or diamond), begin trimming away excess temporary material along the facial and lingual margins. The red line
previously placed will help, especially if an auxiliary is
trimming the temporary (Fig. 20-38, A). On multipleunit temporaries, a thin diamond instrument or the
slender 169L bur or diamond can be used to refine interproximal embrasures (see Fig. 20-38, B). After the excess temporary material has been removed from the facial and lingual embrasures, cut through the adjacent
unprepared tooth (teeth) 1 mm away from the proximal
contact(s) (see Fig. 20-38, C). Insert a knife into the cut,
and pry off the temporary from the cast. Now improve
the contour of the proximal surface that will contact the
adjacent, unprepared tooth (see Fig. 20-38, D). Do not
disturb the contact area on the temporary that was accurately formed on the gypsum cast.
Try the temporary on the teeth (see Fig. 20-38, E). It
should fit well, make desirable contact with the adjacent
teeth, and meet occlusal requirements with minimal ad-

justments (see Fig. 20-38, F). If occlusal adjustments are
indicated, alternately mark the prematurities with articulating paper and reduce these with an appropriate rotary instrument. After correcting the occlusion, smooth
any roughness or undesirable sharp edges with a rubber
point or wheel. Remove the temporary from the mouth,
and lay it aside for cementation with temporary cement
after the final impression has been made.
Technique for Direct Temporary. The direct temporary technique involves forming the temporary restoration directly on the prepared tooth (teeth) and has the
following advantages (Fig. 20-39): (1) The direct technique involves fewer steps and materials because no
postoperative impression and gypsum cast are required. (2) It is much faster than the indirect technique.
The main disadvantages of the direct temporary technique include the following: (1) there is a chance of locking hardened temporary materials into small undercuts
on the prepared tooth and the adjacent teeth, (2) the
marginal fit may be slightly inferior to the indirect technique; and (3) it is more difficult to contour the temporary without the guidelines offered by the postoperative cast.
Forming the temporary directly on the prepared tooth
requires the preoperative impression (see Fig. 20-2, C).
Trial seat the preoperative impression onto the teeth to
verify that it seats completely.
Because there is a potential for locking the temporary on
the tooth, it is necessary to eliminate undercuts in the

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-39 Forming direct temporary with preoperative alginate impression. MODF onlay preparation for mandibular first molar is used for illustration. A, Preoperatively, patient had symptoms indicating incomplete fracture of vital tooth. B, After preparation for
onlay, incomplete fracture (f) of dentin seen extending mesiodistally along pulpal floor.
To maximize retention and resistance forms, all cusps are reduced for capping, a facial
surface groove extension is prepared, and all four transitional line angles have skirt extensions. Glass-ionomer cement bases were inserted into excavations on axial walls
( gi). Cement bases should have light coat of water-soluble lubricant to prevent adhesion. C, Trim away much of the border of preoperative alginate impression to facilitate
seating. Trial seating of preoperative impression helps identify areas that interfere with
seating. D, Flow mixed temporary material into preoperative impression of prepared
tooth. E, Seat preoperative impression with temporary material onto prepared tooth.
F, Formed temporary is removed from preparation (note contact area, c, which must not
be removed during trimming). G, Thin excess can be removed with scissors. H, Internal
surface of temporary has record of cavosurface margin that is used as guide for final
tri mming. I, After final impression is made, temporary is cemented with temporary cement. Temporary material over skirt extensions is left slightly overcontoured for additional strength.

preparation and occasionally in the proximal areas. Undercuts in the preparation should be "blocked out" using
a light-cured glass-ionomer cement base (see Fig. 20-39, B).
A light film of petroleum jelly over any exposed base prevents adherence and facilitates removal.

When using the direct technique with inlay and onlay
preparations (preparations that gain their retention primarily through internal retention features), it is helpful to
select temporary material systems that become elastic before final set, thus allowing removal from undercuts with-

CHAPTER

out permanent distortion. Mix the temporary material following the manufacturer's instructions. Place the material
into the preoperative impression in the area of the prepared tooth, taking care not to entrap air (see Fig. 20-39, D).
Place the impression on the teeth, making sure it seats
completely (see Fig. 20-39, E). Follow the manufacturer's
instructions for gauging the setting time. Most temporary
systems recommend monitoring the setting by rolling
some excess material into a small ball and holding it between two fingers. When the temporary material has set
to a firm stage, remove the impression. The formed temporary should remain on the prepared tooth. Test the temporary by pressing on the occlusal surface slightly, and
when the material is sufficiently strong, remove it from
the tooth using a Black spoon excavator (see Fig. 20-39, F).
Trim away the excess material (see Fig. 20-39, G). The
cavosurface margins of the preparation can be seen inside
the temporary and are used as a guide for trimming the
critical external areas near the margins (see Fig. 20-39, H).
The techniques for try-in, adjustment, and finishing the
direct temporary are identical to those described in the
previous section (see Fig. 20-39, I).
FINAL IMPRESSION
The indirect technique for making cast metal restorations is accurate and dependable. Fabrication of the cast
metal restoration takes place in the laboratory, using a
gypsum cast made from an impression of the prepared
and adjacent unprepared teeth. The impression material
used for the final impression should have the following
qualities:
1.

2.
3.

4.
5.
6.

It must become elastic after placement in the mouth
because it must be withdrawn from undercut regions
that usually exist on the prepared and adjacent
teeth. Note the shaded portions in Fig. 20-40, which
are undercut areas with regard to the line of draw of
the preparation. A satisfactory impression must register some of this undercut surface to sharply delineate the margin and to signify the desirable contour
of the restoration in regions near the margin.
It must have adequate strength to resist breaking or
tearing on removal from the mouth.
It must have adequate dimensional accuracy, stability, and reproduction of detail so that it is an exact
negative imprint of the prepared and adjacent unprepared teeth.
It must have handling and setting characteristics
that meet clinical requirements.
It must be free of toxic or irritating components.
It must be able to be disinfected without distortion.

In addition to the previously mentioned absolute requirements, the choice of impression material is usually
made by comparisons of cost; ease of use; working time,
shelf life; and pleasantness of odor, taste, and color. The most

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG . 20-40 Shaded area on prepared tooth is undercut in rel ation to line of withdrawal of impression. Impression materi al that is in position of greatest undercut (u) must be withdrawn in direction of vertical arrow and flexed over greatest
heights of contour (h). Position of gingival attachment is indicated by x.

common impression materials used for the indirect casting technique are the polyvinyl siloxanes (addition reaction silicones). The technique for the use of this material
is discussed in detail in the following sections.
Tissue Retraction. Final impression materials will
only make accurate impressions of tooth surfaces that
are visible, clean, and dry. Therefore when margins are
subgingival, it is necessary to use retraction cord to temporarily displace the free gingiva away from the tooth
and to control the flow of any gingival hemorrhage and
sulcular fluids. The objective of gingival retraction is to
widen the gingival sulcus to provide access for the impression material to reach the subgingival margins in
adequate bulk to resist tearing during impression withdrawal (see Fig. 20-40). The objective of hemorrhage
and moisture control is met by the use of retraction cord
impregnated with appropriate styptics (such as aluminum chloride) and/or vasoconstrictors (such as epinephrine). The use of vasoconstrictors in retraction cord is
contraindicated in some patients, especially those who
have cardiac arrhythmias, severe cardiovascular disease, uncontrolled hyperthyroidism, diabetes, and those
receiving drugs such as B-blockers, monoamine oxidase
inhibitors, or tricyclic antidepressants.'
All sensory nerves to the region should be anesthetized, cotton rolls applied, and the saliva ejector in
serted. Profound local anesthesia substantially reduces salivation to facilitate a dry field and allows tissue retraction

Select and cut a retraction cord
of suitable diameter that is slightly longer than the
length of the gingival margin. The cord may be cut long
enough to extend from one gingival margin to another
if they are on the same tooth or on adjacent teeth. Note
in Fig. 20-41, A and B, that the cord is inserted into the
gingival sulcus only in areas where the cavosurface
margin is prepared subgingivally. Using the edge of a
paddle-tipped instrument or the side of an explorer,
gently place one end of the cord into the sulcus, about
without patient discomfort.

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

20-41 A and B, Inserting retraction cord to widen gingival sulcus for exposing gingival
margin. Separate lengths of cord can be inserted (one for each gingival margin) (A), or a cord
l ong enough to run from one gingival margin to another can be inserted (B). Where margin is
not subgingival, as on lingual surface of molar, cord should not be in sulcus. C, Correct application of retraction cord. D, Incorrect application of retraction cord causing impression material
to tear at x. E, Maxillary quadrant before preparing teeth for onlays. Note fracture of mesiofacial cusp of molar. F, Facial view of E. G, Bitewing radiograph of E. H, Teeth prepared for onlays
and ready for making final impression. Lingual and distofacial transitional line angles of premolars are prepared for skirting.
FIG.

C H A P T E R 20

2 mm facial to the point where the facial margin passes
under the free gingiva. Then progressively place the
cord into the remainder of the sulcus, leaving the end of
the cord exposed, to grasp with tweezers later in the
technique (see Fig. 20-41, A to C and H). It is emphasized
that the cord is placed to widen the sulcus and not to depress
soft tissue gingivally (although some temporary retraction does occur apically).
Occasionally, when the gingival margin is deep, it is
helpful to insert a second cord of the same or larger diameter over the first. When the free gingiva is thin and the
sulcus is narrow (e.g., facial surface of the maxillary or
mandibular canine), a cord of very small diameter must be selected to prevent undue trauma to the tissue. In instances
when a small diameter cord is used, layering a second
cord on top of the first may be necessary to keep the sulcus from narrowing at the gingival crest.
In Fig. 20-41, D, the cord is incorrectly placed because it
is tucked too deeply into a sulcus whose depth permitted
such positioning. When the cord is withdrawn before the
injection of the impression material, the sulcus will be
wide at the bottom but narrow at the top. If impression
material is successfully injected into such a sulcus, the
material is likely to tear in the region of x during the removal of the impression from the mouth. Correct application of the retraction cord is shown in Fig. 20-41, C.
Occasionally the retraction cord becomes displaced
from the sulcus during its insertion if there is slight hemorrhage or seepage, but this can be controlled if an
assistant repeatedly touches the cord with dry cotton
pellets or dries the area with a gentle stream of air.
When excessive hemorrhage from the interproximal tissue occurs, first wet a cotton pellet with aqueous aluminum chloride solution, and then wedge the pellet in
between the teeth so that it presses on the bleeding tissue. Leave this pellet for several minutes before removing it and inserting the cord. Recall that the widening or
opening of the gingival sulcus by the previous insertion
of retraction cord before the beveling of the gingival
margin also should minimize or eliminate hemorrhage
of the gingiva.
For retracting a large mass of tissue, first make a suitably shaped, large-diameter cotton pack by rolling cotton fibers between the fingertips; then wet the pack with
a drop or two of aqueous aluminum chloride, and insert
it into the sulcus.
The cords remain in place for several minutes. When
hemorrhage or excessive tissue is present, more time is
recommended. The region must remain free of saliva
during this interval, and the patient should be cautioned
not to close or allow the tongue to wet the teeth. Placing
cotton rolls over the teeth and having the patient close
lightly to relax while the teeth remain isolated is sometimes helpful.
Caution: Some brands of latex gloves and some hemostatic
agents contain chemicals that can inhibit the setting of

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

polyvinyl siloxane impression materials. Judicious cleaning of
the teeth and the retraction cord to remove any chemicals that
could prevent the setting of the impression material may be
necessary. After cleaning, do not excessively dry the prepared
teeth with compressed air. Have the patient close lightly on
cotton rolls until the impression material is ready to be
applied.
Polyvinyl Siloxane Impression. The polyvinyl siloxane impression is discussed in detail because it is widely
used, and the technique for its use can be readily applied
to most other impression materials. Polyvinyl siloxane
impression materials have many advantages over other
i mpression materials used for final impressions. They
have excellent reproduction of detail and excellent dimensional stability over time. They are user-friendly because they are easy to mix and have no unpleasant odor
or taste. Polyvinyl siloxane impressions can withstand
disinfection routines without significant distortion.
Some silicone impression materials come in the form of
two pastes (base and catalyst) that are mixed before application to the teeth (Fig. 20-42, A). For even more convenience, most of these materials are available in disposable, automix, cartridge dispensing systems. These
automix systems provide excellent mixing of the accelerator and base pastes as they are dispensed through a disposable injection tip (see Fig. 20-42, B).
Tray Selection and Preparation. The impression
tray must be sufficiently rigid to avoid deformation during the impression technique. If the tray bends or flexes
at any time, the accuracy of the impression may be affected. Two types of trays, commercial stock and custom
made, are suitable. The convenience and time saved
with the use of stock, plastic trays is noteworthy. The
custom resin tray made over a 2- to 3-mm wax spacer on
the study cast is an excellent tray. A thickness of impression material greater than 3 mm increases shrinkage
and the chance of voids; a thickness less than 2 mm may
lead either to distortion or tear of the impression material, or to breakage of narrow or isolated teeth on the
cast during withdrawal from the impression. Adequate
bonding of impression material to the tray is accomplished with the application of a special adhesive to the
tray (see Fig. 20-42, C).
I mpression Technique. Most dental manufacturers
offer their polyvinyl siloxane impression materials in
automix dispensing systems. The automixing systems
have many advantages, including (1) speed, (2) consistent and complete mixing of accelerator and base pastes,
and (3) the incorporation of very few air voids during
mixing and delivery to the teeth. The technique requires
two viscosities of impression material, a light-bodied
material to inject around the preparation and a heavybodied material to fill the tray. Two dispensing guns are
needed (Fig. 20-43, A). The dispensers are loaded with
cartridges that contain the accelerator and base pastes
(see Fig. 20-43, B). A disposable automixing tip fits onto

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG . 20-42 A, Light-bodied (syringe-type) and heavy-bodied
(tray-type) polyvinyl siloxane impression materials. B, Automixing system for polyvinyl siloxane impression materials.
C, Painting adhesive on stock tray.

the end of each cartridge (see Fig. 20-43, C). The lightbodied mixing tip has an accessory curved tip that is
small enough to gain access to the smallest, most remote
areas of the preparation (see Fig. 20-43, D).
Use the first dispenser to mix and fill the impression
tray with the heavy-bodied impression material (see
Fig. 20-43, E). Keep the dispensing tip embedded in the
impression material as it is expressed into the tray, to
decrease the chances of trapping air. Now use the second dispenser to mix and inject the light-bodied impression material on the prepared teeth (see Fig. 20-43,
F). Examine the teeth to be sure the field is still clean and
dry. Remove any visible moisture on the teeth with
compressed air. Gently remove the retraction cord with
operative pliers. All preparation surfaces should be clean,
dry, and exposed to view. Next, deliberately and progressively (moving from distal to mesial) fill the opened gingival sulci and preparations over and beyond the margins with material from the syringe. To avoid trapping
air, keep the tip directly on the gingival and pulpal
walls, thereby filling the preparations from gingival to
occlusal, and regulate the flow so that material will not
be extruded too fast ahead of the tip. Light-bodied material also is injected on the occlusal surfaces of the unprepared adjacent teeth to eliminate the trapping of air
on the occlusal grooves.
After filling and covering the teeth with material from
the syringe, immediately remove the cotton rolls, and

seat the loaded tray over the region. Follow the product
instructions for how long to let the material set before
removal. As an additional safeguard, test the set of the
impression material wherever it is accessible at the periphery of the tray. When it recovers elastically from an
indentation made by the tips of the operative pliers, it is
ready for removal.
Removing and Inspecting the Impression. After
the polyvinyl siloxane impression has properly polymerized, remove it from the mouth by a quick, firm pull
that is directed as much as possible in line with the
draw of the preparation. Removal is aided by inserting
a fingertip at the junction of the facial border of the impression and the vestibule fornix, disrupting the vacuum that occasionally occurs during withdrawal, especially with full-arch impressions. Inspect the impression
carefully with good lighting and magnification. It
should register every detail of the teeth and preparation(s) (Fig. 20-44).
WORKING CASTS AND DIES

The working cast is an accurate replica of the prepared
and adjacent unprepared teeth that allows the cast
metal restoration to be fabricated in the laboratory. During this fabrication procedure, it is most helpful if the
replicas of prepared and adjacent unprepared teeth,
called dies, are individually removable. The most used
methods for creating a working cast with removable

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG. 20-43

A, Dispensers, cartridges, and mixing tips for automixing polyvinyl siloxane impression materials. B, One dispenser is loaded with light-bodied impression material, while
other dispenser is loaded with heavy-bodied impression material. C, Disposable automixing tip
fits onto end of cartridge. D, Accessory curved tip is added to end of automixing tip for the lightbodied material.
Continued

dies from an elastic impression require two pours. The
first pour is made to produce the removable dies, and
the second pour is made to establish intra-arch relationships. Working casts made in this manner are called split
casts.

Several satisfactory methods are available for making
a split cast with removable dies. The Pindex system
(Coltene/Whaledent Inc., Mahwah, New Jersey) is illustrated because it offers many advantages, including:
1.
2.
3.

The first pour becomes the die segment and can be
made quickly and easily.
Dowel pins can be positioned precisely where
needed.
Dowel pins are automatically positioned parallel,
which facilitates die removal.

Pouring the Final Impression. Make a mix of highstrength die stone using a vacuum mechanical mixer
and pour the dies with the aid of a vibrator and a No. 7
spatula. Apply the first increments in small amounts, al-

lowing the material to flow into the remote corners and an-

gles of the preparation without trapping air. Surface ten-

sion-reducing agents are available that allow the stone
to more readily flow into the deep, internal corners of
the impression. The impression should be sufficiently
filled so that the dies will be approximately 15 to 20 mm
tall occlusogingivally after trimming. This may require
surrounding the impression with boxing wax before
pouring. After the die stone has set, remove the cast
from the impression and inspect it for completeness
(Fig. 20-45). This first pour (die segment) will become
the removable dies.
Completing the Working Cast. Trim the base of the
die segment flat on a model trimmer (Fig. 20-46, A). This
trimming will be approximately parallel to the occlusal
surfaces of the teeth. Be careful while doing this not to
allow any grinding slurry to splash onto the dies. Remember that you want the dies to be approximately
15 mm occlusogingivally. Once the base of the die segment is flat, trim the sides closer to the facial and lingual
of the teeth (see Fig. 20-46, B). Remove deep scratches
left by the model trimmer by wet sanding the base of the
die segment with 220-grit wet/dry sandpaper.

CHAPTER 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-43, cont'd E, Impression tray is filled with heavy-bodied material. F, Remove retraction
cord and progressively fill opened sulci and preparations over and beyond cavosurface margins
without trapping air. Note that occlusal surfaces of adjacent unprepared teeth are covered by
li ght-bodied impression material. G, Remove cotton rolls and seat impression tray. H, Completed automixed polyvinyl siloxane impression.

FIG 20-45 Cast poured from die stone is inspected for
completeness.
FIG. 20-44 Close-up view of impression shows sharp detail of
record of gingival floor (gf), gingival bevel (gb) and margin
(gm), and a small amount of unprepared tooth surface (ts) beyond the margin.

General rule: The teeth to be removable are the prepared
teeth with proximal gingival margins and any unprepared
teeth adjacent to prepared proximal surfaces.

There are two main advantages to making removable
dies of unprepared teeth adjacent to prepared proximal

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

A
FIG 20-46 A, Base of die segment is trimmed flat and approximately parallel to the occlusal
surfaces with a model trimmer. Dies should be approximately 15 mm tall occlusogingivally.
B, Die segment is trimmed on the facial and lingual surfaces to reduce need for trimming in later
steps.

A

B

FIG 20-47

A, Die segment on Pindex machine, ready to drill hole for first molar die. A small red
dot of light helps position the cast. B, Holes drilled for removable dies.

A

B
FIG 20-48 A, Flow a drop of cyanoacrylate glue into each hole. The cast must be dry for the
glue to adhere. B, Immediately insert a dowel pin into the hole, being sure it is fully seated.

surfaces: (1) The adjacent tooth will not interfere with
removing the die that has the preparation, as occasionally may happen otherwise. (2) Adjusting the contacts is
easier and more accurate when waxing and finishing
the castings.
Usually place one dowel pin in each prepared tooth
and each adjacent tooth. When long sections of teeth are
to be removable, you may wish to place more than one
pin to increase stability and prevent rotation of the die.
Place the cast on the Pindex drilling machine and drill
one hole into the die base precisely in the middle of each
tooth that is to be removable (Fig. 20-47, A and B). A
small light beam helps position the cast correctly. Once

all the holes are drilled, a small drop of cyanoacrylate
glue is placed in each hole, and a dowel pin is inserted
(Fig. 20-48, A and B). The cast must be dry before cementing the pins, or the cement may not adhere. Remove any excess glue and be sure the dowel pins are
parallel to one another (Fig. 20-49, A). To prevent rotation of the dies on the model base, small dimples may be
placed just facial and lingual to each dowel pin with one
third the diameter of a No. 6 round bur (see Fig. 20-49, B).
Place a bead of rope wax around the die segment level
with the base of the dies (Fig. 20-50, A). Now add boxing wax around this to form a container for the base
pour (see Fig. 20-50, B). Apply a separating medium on

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

B
FIG 20-49 A, Be sure the dowel pins are parallel to one another, fully seated, and there is no
excess glue. B, To aid in indexing, cut small dimples in the base of the dies, using one third the
diameter of a large (No. 6) round bur. Typically these are positioned facial and lingual to the
dowel pin.

A

B
FIG 20-50 A, Place rope wax around the cast, flush with the die bases. B, Place boxing wax
around the rope wax to create a container for the base pour. A separating agent must be painted
on die bases to prevent adherence with base pour.

A
FIG 20-51 A, Base pour completed. Leave at least 1 mm of the dowel pin protruding. B, Cast
after removing boxing and rope wax.

the die segment, and vibrate a mix of dental stone into
the boxing wax container (Fig. 20-51, A). Allow at least
1 mm of the ends of the dowel pins to protrude. To provide adequate strength, the base of the cast should not
be less than 10 mm thick.
After the stone has hardened, remove the boxing and
rope wax. Remove the cast from the impression (see
Fig. 20-51, B). Tap the end of each dowel pin lightly with
the end of an instrument handle until a different sound
is heard; this indicates that the die segment has moved
slightly from its seating (Fig. 20-52, A). Next, carefully
push the ends of the pins conjointly, causing the die
segment to move equally away from its seating (see

Fig. 20-52, B). After the die segment is removed in this
manner, the teeth that are to be individually removable
must be cut apart from one another (Fig. 20-53). This requires the use of a saw, bur, or disk. To aid in carving
the wax pattern and polishing the casting, carefully
trim the gingival aspect of the dies to properly expose
the gingival margins (Fig 20-54, A to C). The trimmed
dies should have a positive and complete seating in the
base portion of the cast (Fig. 20-55, A and B).
Caution: Do not allow any debris between the die portion
and base or the accuracy will be compromised. This is espe-

cially true for the walls of the dowel pin holes. A small
bit of wax or gypsum can be carelessly pressed onto the

CHAPTER 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG. 20-52 A, Tap on the end of each dowel pin until the die segment moves. B, Removing die

segment from base.

FIG. 20-53 Carefully cut the dies apart using a

saw, bur, or thin diamond abrasive disk. Eye
protection and dust collection are essential.

FIG. 20-54 A, Excess die stone around gingival

margins usually prevents good access for later
steps in fabrication. B, Removing the excess
die stone with a large crosscut carbide bur in
slow speed handpiece. Trimming across
slightly gingival of recorded gingival contour of
tooth weakens the excess, causing it to fall
away. C, Final trimming is completed with a
sharp scalpel.

wall and prevent complete seating of the pin. Such debris is difficult to detect and remove to regain accuracy.
Use of the Interocclusal Records. A MI interocclusal
record was made before making the final impression.
From this interocclusal record, a gypsum cast of the opposing teeth is made that can be accurately related to
the working cast, when forming the occlusal surface of
the wax pattern. This step can be omitted if full-arch
casts are to be used in waxing. (See Chapter 2 for the

principles of developing occlusion when using full-arch
casts.)
When using this type of interocclusal record, the
working cast is mounted on a simple hinge articulator.
Attach the working cast to one member of the articulator with fast-setting plaster. Carefully fit the interocclusal record on the dies of the working cast (Fig. 20-56, A
and B). The interocclusal record should and must seat
completely without rocking. Interocclusal bite records

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

B

A
20-55 A, Cast completed, lingual view. Note how each prepared tooth is removable, as
well as the adjacent unprepared teeth. B, Cast completed, facial view. Note full seating of dies.
FIG .

20-56 Pouring interocclusal record made with bite registration paste. A, Trimming
away some of the interocclusal record (on preparation side) with sharp knife is often necessary to allow complete seating on working cast. B, Fastening seated interocclusal
record to working cast of preparations first shown in Fig. 20-33, A, with small amounts
of sticky wax. C, Pouring stone into interocclusal record. D, Attaching gypsum to upper
member of hinge articulator. E through G, Three views of completed mounting.
FIG.

G
must never touch registrations of soft tissue areas on the
cast because these contacts usually interfere with complete seating. Such areas of contact on the interocclusal
record can be easily trimmed away with a sharp knife.
After ensuring that the interocclusal record is completely seated, lute the record to adjacent unprepared

teeth with sticky wax to prevent dislodgment when
dental stone is poured into the record. Then pour dental
stone into the record (see Fig. 20-56, C). Now attach this
gypsum to the opposite arm of the hinge articulator (see
Fig. 20-56, D), let this set, and remove the interocclusal
record (see Fig. 20-56, E through G).

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG . 20-57 To ensure optimal wax adaptation to preparation walls, first flow on a thin layer of
wax (A), and then apply finger pressure for several seconds while wax cools (B).

WAX PATTERNS
Forming the Pattern Base. Lubricate the die and incrementally add liquid wax from a No. 7 wax spatula by
the "flow and press" method to form the proximal, facial, and lingual surface aspects of the pattern. Then add
a thin layer of wax on the occlusal surface (Fig. 20-57, A).
Wax shrinks as it cools and hardens and therefore tends
to pull away from the die. This effect can be minimized
and pattern adaptation thus improved, by applying finger pressure for at least several seconds on each increment of wax soon after surface solidification and before
any subsequent wax additions (see Fig. 20-57, B). In this
incremental technique, the wax that is flowed on the previously applied wax must be hot enough, or else voids
will be formed.
Forming the Proximal Contour and Contact. The
proximal contour and contact of the pattern are now
formed upon the pattern base (Figs. 20-58 and 20-59).
The normal proximal contact relationship between teeth
is that of two curved surfaces touching one another.
Therefore the contact on each curved proximal surface
is a point inside a small area of near approach. However, it must be realized that soon after eruption and the
establishment of proximal contact, wear of the contact
point due to physiologic movement of teeth will create
a contact surface. Lack of a proximal contact is usually
undesirable because it opens the possibility of proximal
drifting of teeth, shifting occlusion, food impaction, and
damage to the supporting tissues. Total lack of a proximal contact is often referred to as an open contact and is
to be avoided.
Drawings of two maxillary premolars (see Fig. 20-59)
are used to illustrate forms of contact and mesiodistal
widths of interproximal spaces. Fig. 20-59, A through C,
represent normal conditions. In Fig. 20-59, A, the position of the contact is marked with an x, the area of near
approach of the two surfaces is indicated with a broken
line and the position of the crest of the gingiva with a
continuous line. Fig. 20-59, B, is a mesiodistal section
through the teeth at the point of contact and Fig. 20-59,
C, is an occlusal view.
A broad contact faciolingually is illustrated in Fig. 2059, D through F. In the proximal view, Fig. 20-59, D, the
position of a normal contact is marked x, while the con-

FIG. 20-58 Measuring diameters of proximal contact faciolingually (f() and occlusogingivally (og) with dental floss. Two
parallel strands should not be more than 1 to 2 mm apart.
(Modified from Black GV: Operative dentistry, ed 8, vol 2,
Woodstock, lll, 1947, Medico-Dental.)

tact of this tooth is the outlined oblong area; the area of
near approach is the broken line. As a rule, the crest of
the gingiva is less arched, being almost horizontal
along the area of near approach. Viewed from the facial
in the mesiodistal section, Fig. 20-59, E, the contact appears to be the same as in Fig. 20-59, B, but a comparison of the occlusal views Fig. 20-59, F and C, shows the
extra breadth of this contact at the expense of the lingual embrasure. Fig. 20-59, H, shows a contact that is
too far to the gingival. Its position in comparison with
normal_ is shown by the relation of the circle to the x in
Fig. 20-59, G. The problem with such a contact is in the
inclinations of the proximal surfaces from the occlusal
marginal ridges to the contact. Stringy food is likely to
become packed into this space and the contact may
impinge on the interproximal tissue.
Fig. 20-59, 1 and J, illustrate a contact too close to the
occlusal. This form is frequently observed in restorations (especially amalgams), seldom in the virgin teeth.
Such a contact allows food to fill the gingival embrasure
and invites proximal caries.

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG

20-59 A through C, Correct contact. Note position and form of contact and
form of embrasures around contact. Also note that mesial and distal pits are bel ow (gingival of) proximal marginal ridges. D through F, Contact too broad faciolingually. G and H, Contact positioned too far gingivally. I and J, Contact too
close to the occlusal surface. K and L, Contact too broad occlusogingivally. (Modified from Black GV: Operative dentistry, ed 8, vol 2, Woodstock, 111, 1947, MedicoDental.)
Fig. 20-59, K and L, illustrate a contact that is too
broad in the occlusogingival direction but narrow faciolingually The principal objections to this form of contact are that stringy foods are likely to be caught and
held; also, if proximal recurrent caries occurs, it will be
farther to the gingival, requiring a tooth preparation
very close to the CEJ.
In cases of excessive proximal wear of the teeth, the
condition of the contact areas is similar to the combination of the areas illustrated in Fig. 20-59, D and K, resulting in a facet of considerable dimensions.
Forming the Occlusal Surface. Payne" developed
the fundamental principles in the following method of
waxing. The technique is particularly applicable when
capping cusps. With practice, it has proved to be faster
than the old method of building up wax, cutting away,
building up again, and so on. The amount of wax desired is added in steps until the occlusal surface of the
pattern is completed (Fig. 20-60).
To obtain the faciolingual position of the cusp tips, divide the faciolingual width of the tooth in quarters. Facial cusps are located on the first facial quarter line. Lingual cusps will fall on the first lingual quarter line (see
Fig. 20-60, B). To obtain the mesiodistal position of the
cusp tips, note the regions in the opposing tooth that
should receive the cusp tips. Now wax to the pattern
small cones of inlay wax to establish the cusp tips one at
a time (see Fig. 20-60, C and D).
Now wax the inner and outer aspects of each cusp, being careful not to generate premature occlusal contacts
(see Fig. 20-60, D to F). Again it is suggested to wax only
one aspect of each cusp into occlusion at a time. For ex-

ample, on the maxillary molar illustrated in Fig. 20-60, D,
where all cusps are being restored, there are nine aspects,
each one to be waxed separately before waxing another.
Follow the proper angle on the inner and outer aspects as
shown in Fig. 20-60, E.
Next, wax the distal slopes of the cusps (one at a time)
into occlusal relation with the opposing teeth. Then wax
the mesial slopes of the cusps (again, one at a time) (see
Fig. 20-60, G). After the cusps are formed, wax in the
proximal marginal ridge areas (see Fig. 20-60, H). Develop the same level to adjacent proximal marginal
ridges, even though occasionally this may sacrifice a
contact on one of the two ridges. Restoring marginal
ridges to the same level avoids a "food trap" that otherwise would be created. The mesial and distal pit regions
also should be carved enough to have them deeper than
the respective marginal ridges. This will provide appropriate spillways for the removal of food from the occlusal table and help prevent food impaction in the occlusal embrasure area of the proximal surface.
To complete the occlusal wax-up, add wax (where appropriate) to the fossae until they contact the opposing
centric holding cusps (see Fig. 20-60, 1). Establish spillways for the movement of food by carving appropriately placed grooves. Flat-plane occlusal relationships
are not desired.
This technique is a systematic and practical method of waxing the occlusal aspect of the pattern into proper occlusion.

Forming one small portion at a time results in waxing
each portion into proper occlusion before adding another, thus simplifying the procedure. Moreover, building the occlusal aspect by such small increments should

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG. 20-60 A, Pattern base is completed and ready for waxing two reduced cusps (distolingual
and distal) into occlusion by using Payne's waxing technique. B, Facial cusps are located on first
facial quarter line, and lingual cusps will fall on first lingual quarter line. C, Distolingual and distal cusp tips are waxed into occlusion in the form of small cones. D, Cone tips and inner and
outer aspects. E, Cone tips and inner and outer aspects of cusps of teeth. F, Inner and outer aspects of distolingual and distal cusps have been added to pattern base. G, Mesial and distal
slopes of cusps of teeth. H, Marginal ridges of teeth. I, After marginal ridge is added to pattern
base, fossae are waxed in, and grooves are carved to complete wax pattern. (Modified from
Payne E: Ney Tech Bull 1(91, 1961.)
help develop a pattern with minimal stress and distortion. Whenever a large portion of wax is added, there is
potential for pattern distortion caused by the large
shrinkage of such an addition.
For establishing stable occlusal relationships, take
care to place cusp tips against flat plateaus or into fossae on the stone cast of the opposing teeth. In other areas, the wax is shaped to simulate normal tooth contours, using adjacent teeth for references. Some relief
between opposing cusp inclines should be provided because these incline contacts often interfere during
mandibular movements. Remember, the MI record only
provides information regarding the position of opposing teeth in MI. Therefore some adjustment to the cast-

ing may be necessary in the mouth to eliminate interferences during mandibular movements. The reader is referred to Chapter 2 for the principles of cusp and fossa
placement when using full-arch casts mounted on a
semiadjustable articulator.
Finishing the Wax Pattern. Careful attention to good
technique is required for waxing the margins of the wax
pattern. There must be a continuous adaptation of wax
to the margins, with no voids, folds, or faults. If adaptation is questionable, remelt the marginal wax to a distance into the pattern of approximately 2 mm. Apply
finger pressure immediately after surface solidification
and before subsequent cooling of the wax, maintaining
this pressure for at least 4 seconds. This finger pressure

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

helps develop close adaptation to the die by offsetting
the cooling shrinkage of the wax. Additional wax
should be added during the remelting procedure to ensure a slight excess of contour and extension beyond the
margin.
Wax that is along the margins is now carved back to
the cavosurface outline with a warmed No. 7 wax spatula (Fig. 20-61, A through E). This warming of the spatula permits carving the marginal wax with light pressure so that the stone margins will not be damaged. A
little practice will help the user determine how much to
heat the instrument to result in easy and effective carving. It must be emphasized that the No. 7 spatula should
not have sharp edges; thus when it lightly touches the
die, it will not abrade or injure the die surface. Use the
die surface just beyond the cavosurface margin to guide
the position and direction of the carving instrument. The
direction of the instrument movement is not dictated by the
margin but by the contour of the unprepared tooth (die) surface just beyond the margin. Hold the instrument blade

parallel to this surface, thus using it as a guide for the
contour of the pattern near the margin. This should result in a continuity of contour across the margin. This
principle of carving is too often neglected, resulting in
the contour errors depicted in x in Fig. 20-61, B through
D; correct application of the carving instrument results
in correct contours, exemplified by y. The completed
patterns are shown in Fig. 20-61, F through I.
On accessible surfaces of the carved pattern, satisfactory smoothness can be imparted by a few strokes with
the end of a finger if surfaces have been carefully carved
with the No. 7 spatula. Rubbing with cotton that has
been twisted onto a round toothpick may smooth less
accessible surfaces, such as grooves.
I nitially Withdrawing and Reseating the Wax Pattern. Care must be exercised when initially withdraw-

ing the wax pattern from the die. The wax can be dislodged by holding the die and pattern as shown in Fig.
20-62. Once the pattern has been dislodged, gently remove it from the preparation. Inspect the preparation
side of the pattern to see if there are any wrinkles or
holes. Such voids indicate poor wax adaptation and
should be corrected if: (1) such voids are in critical regions of the preparation designed to provide retention
form, (2) if they are numerous, or (3) if they are closer
than 1 mm to the margin. To eliminate these voids, first
relubricate the die and reseat the pattern on the die.
Then pass a hot instrument through the wax to the unadapted area. This usually results in the air (void) rising
through the liquid wax to the patterns surface as the
wax takes the place of the air. A consequence of this correcting procedure on the occlusal surface is the obliteration of the occlusal carving in the affected region, thus
requiring the addition of wax, recarving, and rechecking the occlusion.

SPRUING, INVESTING, AND CASTING

If there is a delay of several hours or more between the
forming of the wax pattern and the investing procedure,
the pattern should remain on the die, and the margins
should be inspected carefully, once again, before spruing and investing. When such a delay is contemplated,
it is suggested to add the sprue to the pattern before the
delay period. If the addition of the sprue caused the induction of enough stress to produce pattern distortion,
such a condition is more evident after the rest period,
and corrective waxing can be instituted before investing. The reader is referred to textbooks on dental materials for the principles and techniques of spruing, investing, casting, and cleaning the casting. Be certain that
all investment is removed from the casting and that it is
properly pickled.
SEATING, ADJUSTING, AND POLISHING
THE CASTING

It is critical to closely examine the casting, preferably
under magnification, before testing the fit on the die.
Closely examine the internal and external surfaces with
good lighting, being alert for any traces of investment,
any positive defects (blebs), or any negative defects
(voids). Voids in critical areas indicate rejection of the
casting, unless they can be corrected by soldering. Carefully remove any small positive defects on the internal
surface with an appropriately sized round bur in the
high-speed handpiece.
Try the casting on the die before removing the sprue
and sprue button, which serve as a handle to remove the
casting, if removal is necessary. The casting should seat
with little or no pressure (Fig. 20-63, A). Ideally it should
have the same feel when being placed on the die as the
feel of the wax pattern when it was seated on the die. If
the casting fails to seat completely, remove it and inspect the die surface for small scratches to see where it
is binding. Usually failure to seat is caused by small
positive defects not seen on the first inspection. Attempts at forcing the casting to place will cause irreparable damage to the die and difficulties when trialseating the casting in the mouth.
Once satisfied with the accuracy of the casting, separate the casting from the sprue, as close to the inlay as
possible, using a carborundum separating disc. Make
the cut twice as wide as the thickness of the disc to prevent binding, and do not cut completely through the
sprue (leave a small uncut portion) (see Fig. 20-63, B). If
the cut is made completely through, control of the disc
is sometimes lost, often resulting in damage to the casting or to the operator's fingers. The uncut portion
should be so small that bending with the fingers will
break it with very little effort (see Fig. 20-63, C).
Having seated the casting on the die, hand burnish the
marginal metal using a ball or beavertail burnisher (see

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-16 A, Wax is carved to margins with warm No. 7 spatula. B through D, Incorrect application of No. 7 spatula to carve contour of marginal wax is shown by x; correct manner is labeled y. E, Carving occlusal groove and pit anatomy. F, Adjacent marginal ridges should be on
same level as much as possible. G, Occlusal view of completed patterns. Note shape of facial
and lingual embrasures and position of contact. H and I, Facial view of completed patterns. Note
gingival and occlusal embrasures and position of contact.

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG
20-62 Removing wax pattern by indirect finger pressure.
( Arrows indicate direction of pressure.) Care must be used not
to squeeze and distort wax pattern as it is initially withdrawn.

Fig. 20-63, D). Burnish an area approximately 1 mm in
width, using strokes that increasingly approach the marginal metal and are directed parallel to the margin. Burnishing improves marginal adaptation and begins the
smoothing process, almost imparting a polish to this
rubbed surface. While burnishing, continually assess the
adaptation of the casting along the margin, using magnification as needed to see any marginal opening as small
as 0.05 mm. Moderate pressure during burnishing is indicated during closure of small marginal gaps. Once the
casting is well adapted, pressure is reduced to a gentle
rubbing for continued smoothing of the metal surface. At
this stage, marginal openings and irregularities should
not be detectable even under ( x1.5 or x2) magnification
(see Fig. 20-63, E and F). Care must be taken not to overburnish the metal because this can crush and destroy the
underlying die surface. Such overburnished metal will
prevent complete seating of the casting on the prepared
tooth. Proper burnishing usually improves the retention
of the casting on the die, so that the casting does not come
loose during subsequent polishing steps. A casting must
not be loose on the die if the inlay is to be properly polished.

Carefully remove the remaining sprue metal with a
heatless stone or a carborundum disc (see Fig. 20-63, G
and H). Accentuate the grooves by lightly applying a
somewhat dull No. 1 round bur (see Fig. 20-63, I) or
other appropriate rotary instrument. Next, use a knifeedge rubber polishing wheel on accessible surfaces (see
Fig. 20-63, J) (Burlew disc, J.F. Jelenko & Co., Armonk,
New York). Guard against the polishing wheel touching
the margins or die because they can be unknowingly
and quickly polished away, resulting in "short" margins
on the tooth. Also, at this time, adjust the proximal contacts one at a time. For example, if the distal surface of a
MOD casting on the first molar is being adjusted, only
the first and second molar dies are on the cast. Remember that proximal contacts are correct when they are the correct size, correctly positioned, and passive. If a temporary

restoration was properly made, these contact relationships will be the same in the mouth as on the cast. Thus
chair time can be conserved by carefully finishing the
contacts on the cast.

Now check the occlusion of the castings by marking
the occlusal contacts with articulating paper. Correct any
premature contacts and refine their locations by selective
grinding. Often prematurities occur where the sprue was
attached and insufficient sprue metal was removed.
Now apply a smaller, rubber, knife-edge wheel, which
should reach some of the remaining areas not accessible
to the larger disc (Fig. 20-64, A and B). The grooves, pits,
and other most inaccessible regions are smoothed by
rubber, abrasive points (Browne and Greenie rubber
points, Shofu Dental Corp., Menlo Park, California) (see
Fig. 20-64, C). Exercise care when using the rubber discs
and points not to touch the die surface and not to destroy
anatomic contours by overpolishing. When finished
with the rubber abrasives, the surface of the casting
should have a smooth, satin finish. Be sure that the contact relationships with the adjacent and opposing teeth
have the correct size, position, and intensity.
Now brush the occlusal surface of the casting with a
soft bristle disc and tripoli (or buffing bar compound
[ BBC]) (BBC Buffing Bar Compound, J.F. Jelenko & Co.,
Armonk, New York) polishing compound, running the
disc parallel with the grooves (see Fig. 20-64, D). Use a
small felt wheel with polishing compound on the proximal and other accessible surfaces (see Fig. 20-64, E).
The metal should be so smooth before this application
of polishing compound that a beautiful luster should
develop in a few seconds. A high sheen may be imparted, if desired, with a felt or chamois wheel and
rouge (see Fig. 20-64, F and G). Again, as in the application of tripoli/BBC, only a few seconds of rouge application should be required. If more time were expended
in the application of these polishing compounds, overpolishing (polishing away) of the margins and die
would result. Also, such overuse of polishing compounds is often an unsuccessful attempt to mask the
fact that the preliminary stages of polishing were not
thoroughly completed.
Clean the polished casting of polishing compounds
by immersing the die with its inlay in a suitable solvent
for a minute or two or by scrubbing with a soft brush
and soap and water. Rinse, and then remove the casting
from the die. No polishing compounds should be found on
the preparation side of the casting or on the preparation walls
of the die. The presence of such materials on these sur-

faces indicates that marginal adaptation on the die is not
as good as it should be.
TRYING-IN THE CASTING
Preparing the Mouth. Local anesthesia of the tooth
may be necessary before removal of the temporary and
the try-in of the casting on the tooth. This blocks stimuli
from inducing pain and salivation, neither of which are
conducive to the best results, particularly in cementation. However, when the teeth are not particularly sensitive, an option is to delay or eliminate administering

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-63 A, Try cleaned casting on die to determine if it has a satisfactory fit. To remove
sprue, first make a cut that is not quite complete and twice the width of the disc (B), and then
bend-break the slim, uncut portion (C). D, Inlay is burnished with No. 2 burnisher along 1-mm
path that is parallel with and adjacent to margin. E, Magnified view of casting before burnishi ng. F, Magnified view of same marginal region shown in E after burnishing. Removing remaini ng sprue metal with heatless stone (G) or with carborundum disc (H). I, Accentuating grooves
with dull No. 1 round bur. J, Smoothing surfaces accessible to rubber polishing wheel.

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-64

Using a small knife-edge rubber disc on areas of the occlusal surface that are accessible to this wheel (A) and on proximal surfaces (B). C, Polishing grooves and other relatively
i naccessible areas with rubber point. D, Applying tripoli/BBC to occlusal surface using bristle
disc. E, Applying tripoli/BBC to proximal surfaces using felt wheel. F, Imparting luster using
chamois wheel and rouge. G, Polished castings.

the anesthesia because the patient can better tell if the
proximal contacts are tight or if the occlusion is high.
Remove the temporary restoration, making sure that
all the temporary cement has been dislodged from the
preparation walls and cleared away. To improve vision,
isolate the region with cotton rolls. Then remove saliva
from the tooth and adjacent teeth with the air syringe.
Seating the Casting and Adjusting Proximal Contacts. Now confirm the fit of the casting on the tooth. A
3 X 3 inch (7.5 X 7.5 cm) gauge sponge should be
placed as a "throat screen" to catch the casting if it is accidentally dropped (see Fig. 20-69, A). Try the casting on
the tooth, using light pressure. Do not force the casting on
the tooth. If the casting does not seat completely, the
most likely cause is an overcontoured proximal surface.
Using the mouth mirror where needed, view into the

embrasures from the facial, lingual, and occlusal aspects. Judge where the proximal contour needs adjustment to allow final seating of the casting, producing at
the same time the correct position and form to the contact. Passing dental floss through the contact(s) will indicate the tightness and position, thus signifying to the
trained operator the degree of excess contact and its location. Apply the floss at an angle and with secure finger-bracing to pass it gently through the contact and not
with a snap that is likely to injure the interproximal soft
tissues. If the floss will not enter or tears on entering, the
contact is excessive. Caution: When adjusting a MOD
restoration, adjust only one excess contact at a time (the
stronger one) before trying again on the tooth and evaluating,

This is done because one excessively strong contact can cause the other
unless both contacts feel equally strong.

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-65 A, Use hand pressure to initially
seat casting on tooth by applying ball burnisher in pit anatomy. B, If casting fits to
within 0.2 mm of seating, ensure complete
seating using masticatory pressure by havi ng patient close on Burlew wheel interposed between casting and opponent tooth
(teeth). C, Inspect marginal fit of tried-in inlay. Do not use cotton roll (D) or piece of
wood (E) in lieu of Burlew wheel method (B).

to feel strong, when in actuality, the latter contact may
be correct or even found to be weak (short of contact) after the excessively strong contact is properly adjusted.
Use the Burlew rubber wheel to adjust the proximal
contour and to correct the contact relationship. This often requires several trials on the tooth, but it is best not
to remove too much at a time. After each trial and removal, the position of contact is visible in the form of a
bright spot on the satiny surface left on the casting from
previous surfacing by the rubber wheel. By noting the
position of this bright spot in conjunction with observation in the mouth of the contact relationship, judgment can be rendered regarding the contact position
and form and whether additional adjustment should be
made to alter this position and form. (For removing the
casting after each trial on the tooth, see Removing the
Casting.)
Often the patient is able to indicate whether the contact is strong, particularly when an anesthetic has not
been given. The patient should not be aware of pressure
between the teeth after the final adjustment of contacts.
Remember that proper proximal contact occurs when a visual inspection verifies that the adjacent proximal surfaces are
touching, and the position and form of the contact relationship are correct; the correct "tightness" of the contacts is best
judged with dental floss. This contact should be passive because any pressure between the teeth would soon resolve and
disappear in undesirable tooth movement.

If the contact is open (short of touching the adjacent
tooth), a new contact area must be soldered to the casting. An open contact is best detected by visual inspec-

tion with the aid of the mouth mirror. The region must
be isolated with cotton rolls and dried with the air syringe. Selection of the proper horizontal viewing angle
usually discloses the space between the teeth. Such an
open contact permits the passage of food, which will affect and irritate the interproximal gingiva.
When satisfied that the proximal contacts are correct
and when hand pressure first positions the casting to
within 0.2 mm of seating (Fig. 20-65, A), remove the 3 X 3
inch (7.5 X 7.5 cm) gauze sponge and make sure the casting completely seats on the tooth by the application of
masticatory pressure. This use of masticatory pressure
should be a routine procedure. It is accomplished by positioning a Burlew disc (unmounted) on the occlusal of the
restoration and requesting the patient to bite firmly; also
request the patient to move the jaw slightly from side to
side while maintaining this firm pressure (see Fig. 20-65,
B). At this time, the operator must judge whether the
restoration is satisfactory or should be rejected and another
casting made. When evaluating the fit (seating) of the casting, view particularly the margins that are horizontally directed (i.e., those that are perpendicular to the line of
draw). Along at least half of the marginal outline, the tip of
the explorer tine should move from tooth onto the metal,
and vice versa, with barely a catch or a bump (see Figs. 2065, C, and 20-66). Some operators advocate the use of a cotton roll or a piece of wood for the patient to bite on for seating pressure (see Fig. 20-65, D and E). However, the cotton
roll may be too large and soft to be effective for seating inlays, and the piece of wood may not properly distribute
the pressure, thus resulting in less effective seating or

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG. 20-66 A through C, Castings tried on teeth. Photographs were taken immediately after
restorations were first seated on teeth before any dressing down or burnishing of margins. Neither occlusal adjustment nor contact adjustment was required. Extension of mesiofacial margin
of second premolar was necessary because of extension of a previous amalgam restoration; extension of distofacial margins of premolars is caused by skirting (or bracing), which provides
maximal resistance form to these weak teeth. Note area on mesiofacial margin of first molar
that is to have composite insert placed after cementation.

tooth fracture. Fig. 20-66 shows the castings tried on the
teeth that were first shown in Fig. 20-41, H.
Occluding the Casting. When the proximal contacts
have been adjusted and the casting is satisfactorily
seated on the tooth, have the patient close into MI, and
inspect the unprepared adjacent teeth to see if there is
any space between opposing wear facets. Usually the
patient can indicate correctly if the casting needs occlusal adjustment; however, the dentist should verify
the occlusal relationship objectively. After drying the
teeth of saliva, insert a strip of articulating paper and request the patient to close and tap the teeth together (in
MI) several times. Remove the paper, and examine it by
holding it up toward the light for evidence of any areas
of penetration caused by the restoration. Any holes can
be matched with heavy markings on the casting, and
there will be shiny, metal-colored spots in the center of
the marks (Fig. 20-67, A). Such heavy contacts should be
reduced with suitable abrasive stones while carefully
observing the following fundamental concepts for equilibration of occlusion. The space observed between
opposing wear facets of adjacent unprepared teeth
(when the teeth are "closed") is an indication of the
maximal amount of vertical reduction of the casting required. Often the "high" occlusal contacts are too broad
and extend onto cusp or ridge slopes. When this occurs,
grind away the most incorrect portion of the incline contact (a
deflective contact), leaving the most correct portion intact

(see Fig. 20-67, B).

Occlusal contacts in MI should be com-

posed of supporting cusp tips placed against flat or smoothly
concave surfaces (or into fossae) for stability. The force vector
of occlusal contacts should be one that parallels the long axis
of the tooth

(see Fig. 20-67, C).

Contacts on inclines tend to

(see Fig. 20-67, D). The
use of articulating paper and the stone is continued until: (1) the heavy markings are no longer produced,
(2) the contacts on the restoration have optimal position
and form, and (3) there is an even distribution of condeflect the tooth and are less stable

tacts on the casting and the adjacent teeth. Visual inspection should verify that the adjacent unprepared
teeth are absolutely touching.
Care must be used not to overreduce occlusal contacts. In the final phase of equilibration, the strength of
occlusal contacts can be tested by using thin plastic
shim stock (Artus Corp., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey)
[0.0005 inch thick (0.013 mm)] as a "feeler gauge." Test
the intensity of the occlusal contacts of the casting and
the adjacent unprepared teeth to see if they hold the
shim stock equally (see Fig. 20-67, E). It may be helpful
to test the occlusal contacts of the adjacent unprepared
teeth with the casting out of the mouth for comparison.
Once the occlusal contacts have been adjusted in MI,
check the casting for contacts that occur during lateral
mandibular movements. Lateral working (functional)
contacts on the casting are marked by: (1) inserting a
strip of articulator paper over the quadrant with the
casting, (2) having the patient close into MI, and (3) then
"sliding" the teeth toward the side of the mouth where
the casting is located. Contacts between the lingual inclines of the maxillary lingual cusps and facial inclines
of the mandibular lingual cusps are considered unusually stressful and should be eliminated (see Fig. 20-67, F).
Contacts between the lingual inclines of the maxillary
facial cusps and the facial inclines of the mandibular facial cusps should remain only if they are passive and a
group function pattern of occlusion is desired.
Insert a strip of articulating paper over the teeth with
the castings, have the patient close into MI, and then
slide the teeth laterally toward the opposite side. This
will mark any lateral nonworking (nonfunctional) contacts
on the restoration. In a normal arrangement of teeth,
contacts that might occur during the nonworking pathway are positioned on the facial inclines of the maxillary
lingual cusps and the lingual inclines of the mandibular
facial cusps. These nonworking contacts must be removed with a suitable stone (Fig. 20-67, G). Complete

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG. 20-67 Occluding the casting. A, Initial occlusal contact is high and produces heavy mark
with metal-colored center. Note corresponding perforation in articulating paper. B, When adjusting occlusal contacts, remove most incorrect portion of contact, leaving most correct portion intact. C, Proper occlusal contacts in MI are composed of cusp tips placed against flat or
smoothly concave surfaces (or fossae) for stability. D, Incline contacts are less stable and tend
to deflect tooth.
Continued

elimination of nonworking contacts can be verified by
using the plastic shim stock. Insert a strip of shim stock
over the casting, and have the patient bite together
firmly. As soon as the patient begins sliding the
mandible toward the opposite side, the shim stock
should slip out from between the teeth.
Now examine the casting for interferences in protrusive mandibular movements using the shim stock and articulating paper. The areas that may have to be adjusted
to prevent contact are the distal inclines of the maxillary
teeth and the mesial inclines of the mandibular teeth.
Finally, interferences that occur on the casting between centric occlusion (CO) and MI are identified and
removed. Most patients have a small discrepancy between centric occlusion and MI. Such a "skid" is considered normal for most patients, but the operator
should be sure that the casting does not have premature
contact at any point between CO and MI. The preferred

technique for manipulating the mandible into centric relation (CR) and making the teeth touch in CO is credited
to Dawson.3 Once the teeth have been marked in CO,
observe the teeth to be sure the casting does not have
premature contacts in CO and that it does not exacerbate any CO-MI skid. If it does, the mesial inclines of
maxillary restorations and the distal inclines of
mandibular restorations are the areas that may need
adjustment.
I mproving Marginal Adaptation. The next step is to
"dress down" the margins, that is, to adapt the metal as
closely as possible to the margins of the tooth. Regardless of how accurately a casting may seat in the preparation, the fit usually can be improved by using the following procedures.
With a ball or beaver-tail burnisher, improve marginal
adaptation by burnishing the marginal metal with
strokes that parallel the margin, the gingival margin ex-

CHAPTER

FIG .

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

20-67,
Occluding the casting. E, Testing intensity of occlusal contacts with thin
cont'd
( 0.0005 inch (0.013 mm] thick) shim stock used as a "feeler gauge." F, Removing undesirable
contact (lingual range) that may occur on working side during lateral mandibular movement.
G, Removing undesirable contact that may occur on nonworking side during lateral mandibular
movement.

cepted (Fig. 20-68, A). If the margin is inaccessible to the
ball or beaver-tail burnisher (as sometimes occurs at the
termination of the casting in groove regions where possibly more enameloplasty or extension could have been
employed), the edge of the discoid-type hand instrument serves well as a burnisher. The discoid is held perpendicular to the margin and is moved parallel with the
margin (see Fig. 20-68, B). The sharp edges of the discoid also will trim away any slight excess of metal at the
margin. Continue with the discoid on other portions of
accessible margins where a slight excess of metal is present. When burnishing the casting on the tooth, be certain the casting is fully seated. Otherwise, burnishing
may bend the marginal metal, keep the casting from
seating, and result in rejection of the casting.
If necessary, the marginal adaptation and continuity
can be further improved by the application of a pointed,
fine-grit carborundum stone, especially where the marginal enamel is slightly "high" and should be reduced
or where more than just a slight amount of excess metal
should be removed (see Fig. 20-68, C). This stone should

be used at low speed with light pressure and should rotate either parallel with the margin or from metal to
tooth across the margin (never from tooth to metal).
After this procedure, again burnish the margins to enhance marginal adaptation and to smooth the marginal
metal.
Another instrument that can be used to improve
marginal fit in accessible areas (such as the occlusal
two-thirds of the proximal margins) is a fine-grit paper
disk. Wherever possible, the disc should be revolved
in a direction from the metal toward the tooth (see
Fig. 20-68, D). Sometimes these margins are inaccessible
to the disc, and a gingival margin trimmer, a gold file, or
a cleoid instrument may be helpful to remove a slight
excess of metal (see Fig. 20-68, E). It is moved in a scraping motion parallel to the margin and will burnish and
trim the metal.
The experienced operator, if properly using the elastic
impression material, with care can produce restoration
margins that require very little or no burnishing or
dressing down. Certainly one of the significant advan-

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-68

A, Burnishing margins with No. 27 ball burnisher. Burnisher is moved parallel with margin. B, Using discoid on margins inaccessible to ball burnisher. It is
moved parallel with margins. (Note small metal scrapings made by this instrument.) C,
Dressing down margins with small carborundum stone, which is rotating from metal
to tooth. D, Applying fine-grit sandpaper disc to accessible supragingival proximal
margins. Disc rotates, wherever possible, from metal to tooth. E, On facial or lingual
margins on proximal surface that are inaccessible to paper disc, use gingival margin
tri mmer to remove any slight excess of metal. F, Using rubber point to smooth metal
and tooth of scratches left by carborundum stone. G, Completed inlays ready for cementation.

tages of the indirect procedure, when correctly applied,
is the high degree of accuracy of the gingival margin
adaptation.
Now the margins should be such that the explorer tip
can pass across the margins smoothly without jumping

or catching. Use rubber polishing points of increasing
fineness at low speed to smooth and polish the accessible areas of roughness left from adjusting procedures
(see Fig. 20-68, F and G). Attempt to preserve anatomic
contour and detail. Take care to use light, intermittent

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-69 Initiating removal of inlay before cementation. A, Place 3 x 3 inch (7.5 x 7.5 cm)
gauze throat screen to prevent swallowing or aspiration of casting should it be accidentally mishandled. B, Tip of sharp Black spoon (15-8-14) is first inserted as deep as possible in occlusal
embrasure with back of spoon against adjacent marginal ridge. C, Spoon is then pivoted in direction of arrow using adjacent tooth as a fulcrum. Note that casting has lifted from its seating.
After only slight unseating, apply similar procedure to distal aspect.

pressure when using rubber points to prevent overheating the tooth. Clean and dry the casting surface to verify that it is smooth and free of scratches.
Removing the Casting. When preparing to remove a
casting from a tooth, first place a 3 x 3 inch (7.5 x 7.5 cm)
gauze sponge throat screen to prevent the patient from
swallowing or aspirating the casting in the event that it is
accidentally mishandled (Fig. 20-69, A). If the casting is
very retentive, first initiate removal with the aid of a sharp
Black spoon (15-8-14). The tip of the spoon is inserted as
deep as possible in the occlusal embrasure with the back
of the spoon resting against the marginal ridge of the
adjacent tooth (see Fig. 20-69, B). With the tip of the spoon
firmly seated against the metal casting, pivot the spoon
using the adjacent tooth as a fulcrum (see Fig. 20-69, C).
Repeat this procedure on the other occlusal embrasure if
the casting is a MOD restoration. This should initiate the
displacement of the casting, making complete removal
thereafter easy.
CEMENTATION

Cement Selection. The selection of cement for permanent cementation is very important to the success of
the final restoration. The advantages and disadvantages
of each cement are discussed in detail in Chapter 4. No
cement is without shortcomings. Each product has specific requirements in regard to tooth surface conditioning, casting surface conditioning, and manipulation
techniques. To obtain optimal performance from the cement,
carefully follow the manufacturer's instructions for dispensing, mixing, and application.

Cementation Technique. Before cementing the casting, isolate the tooth from saliva with the aid of cotton
rolls (and saliva ejector if necessary) (Fig. 20-70, A). With
the air syringe, dry the preparation walls, but do not
desiccate them. This air should eliminate visible moisture from the walls, except possibly on the gingival
bevel. Now mix the cement following the manufacturer's instructions. With the cement mix applied generously to the preparation side of the casting (see Fig. 20-

70, B), start the casting to place with the fingers or with
operative pliers. Next, place the ball burnisher in the pit
areas (first one and then another), exerting firm pressure
to seat the casting (see Fig. 20-70, C). Then place a
Burlew disc over the casting, remove the saliva ejector,
and request the patient to close and exert biting force
(see Fig. 20-70, D and E). Ask the patient also to move
the mandible slightly from side-to-side, while continuing to exert pressure. Several seconds of this pressure is
sufficient. When the disc is removed, much of the occlusal area should be clean of the cement mix and therefore easier to inspect and verify complete seating of the
casting. When the cusps are capped, complete seating of
the casting is verified by inspection of the facial and lingual margins after wiping the excess cement away (see
Fig. 20-70, F). Now while the cement is still soft, burnish
all accessible margins. The saliva ejector is replaced in
the mouth and the region is kept dry during the setting of
the cement. Excess moisture during this setting reaction
can weaken many types of cement.
After the cement has hardened, excess is cleaned off
with an explorer and air-water spray. Dental floss
should be passed through the contact, carried into the
interproximal gingival embrasures and sulci, and
pulled facially and lingually to help in the removal of
cement in this region (see Fig. 20-70, G). Tying a small
knot in the floss will help dislodge small bits of interproximal cement. Finally, directing a stream of air into
the gingival sulcus will open it and reveal any remaining small pieces of cement, which then should be removed. When cementing has been properly accomplished, a cement line should not be a visible at the
margins (see Fig. 20-70, H). A quadrant of inlays after cementation is illustrated in Fig. 20-71.
REPAIR

The weak link of most cast metal inlays and onlays is
the cement seal. At times you will find discrepancies at
margins that require replacement or repair. If the
restoration is intact and retentive, and if the defective

C H A P T E R 20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG 20-70 Cementing cast metal onlay on preparation initially shown in Fig. 20-39, B. A, Isol ate tooth from saliva with cotton rolls. B, Applying cement with No. 2 beaver-tail burnisher to
preparation side of onlay. C, Seating onlay with ball burnisher and hand pressure. D, Placing
Burlew disc over onlay.
Continued

margin area is small and accessible, then small repairs
can be attempted with amalgam or composite. However, if cement loss is found in one area of the restoration, other areas are usually suspect. The most common
procedure once defects are found is to remove the defective restoration and replace it.
SUMMARY
Cast metal inlays and onlays offer excellent restorations
that may be underutilized in dentistry. The technique
requires multiple patient visits and excellent laboratory
support, but the resulting restorations are durable and
long lasting. High noble alloys are desirable for patients
concerned with allergy or sensitivity to other restorative
materials. Cast metal onlays in particular, can be designed to strengthen the restored tooth while conserving more tooth structure than a full crown. Disadvantages such as high cost and esthetics limit their use, but
when indicated they provide a restorative option that is

less damaging to pulpal and periodontal tissues than a
full crown.
REFERENCES
Carson J et al: A thermographic study of heat distribution
during ultra-speed cavity preparation, J Dent Res 58(7):16811684, 1979.
2. Crispin BL et al: The marginal accuracy of treatment restora-

tions: a comparative analysis, J Prosthet Dent 44:283-290,
1980.
3. Dawson PE: A classification system for occlusions that relates

maximal intercuspation to the position and condition of the
temporomandibular joints, J Prosthet Dent 75(1):60-66,
1996.
4. Fisher DW et al: Indirect temporary restorations, J Am Dent
Assoc 82:160-163, 1971.
5. Fisher DW et al: Photoelastic analysis of inlay and onlay

preparations, J Prosthet Dent 33(1):47-53, 1975.
6. Grajower R et al: Temperature rise in pulp chamber during
fabrication of temporary self-curing resin crowns, J Prosthet
Dent 41(5):535-540, 1979.

868

CHAPTER

20

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

FIG . 20-70, cont'd Cementing cast metal onlay on preparation initially shown in Fig. 20-39, B.
E, Patient is instructed to apply masticatory pressure, while at the same time slightly moving the
j aw from side to side. F, When disc is lifted from casting, much of occlusal is free from cement.
With a sweeping, rolling motion of forefinger, clean any accessible facial surface margin of excess cement to permit visual inspection for verification of proper seating of onlay. Similarly
clean any accessible lingual margin of excess cement. Full seating also should be verified tactilely with explorer tine. G, Remove excess set cement with explorer and air-water spray. Use
dental tape with small knot to dislodge small pieces of interproximal cement. H, Onlay after cementation.

FIG 20-71A, Cemented castings on teeth first shown in Fig. 20-41, E. Photo was taken immediately after cementation and insertion of composite insert on molar. B, Bitewing radiograph of
restored quadrant shown in A. Note fit of inlays at gingival margins and contour of proximal surfaces.

CHAPTER 20

7. Hood JA: Biomechanics of the intact, prepared and restored
tooth: some clinical implications, Int Dent j 41(l):25-32,1991.
8. Hume WR: A new technique for screening chemical toxicity
to the pulp from dental restorative materials and procedures,
J Dent Res 64(11):1322-1325, 1985.
9. Malamed SF: Handbook of local anesthesia, ed. 4, St Louis,
1997, Mosby.
10. Moulding MB, Loney RW: The effect of cooling techniques on
intrapulpal temperature during direct fabrication of provisional restorations, Int jProsthodont 4(4):332-336, 1991.

Class II Cast Metal Restorations

11. Payne E: Reproduction of tooth form, Ney Tech Bull 1(9), 1961.
12. Stanley HR: Effects of dental restorative materials: local and
systemic responses reviewed, J Am Dent Assoc 124(10):76-80,
1993.
13. Sturdevant JR et al: The 8-year clinical performance of 15
low-gold casting alloys, Dent Mater 3(6):347-352, 1987.
14. Wataha JC: Biocompatibility of dental casting alloys: a review,
J Prosthet Dent 83(2):223-234, 2000.

I.

I I.

III.

Direct golds and principles of manipulation, 873
A. Materials and manufacture, 873
B. Cohesion and degassing, 874
C. Principles of compaction, 874
D. Compaction technique for gold foil, 876
E. Compaction technique for E-Z Gold, 877
Principles of tooth preparation for direct gold
restorations, 877
A. Fundamentals of tooth preparation, 877
B. Indications and contraindications, 878
Tooth preparations and restorations, 878
A. Class I tooth preparation and restoration, 878
1. Tooth preparation design, 878
2. Instrumentation, 879
3. Restoration, 879

I V.

B. Class V tooth preparation and restoration, 880
1. The operating field, 880
2. Tooth preparation design, 882
3. Instrumentation, 884
4. Restoration, 886
C. Class III tooth preparation and restoration, 889
1. Tooth preparation design for maxillary incisors, 889
2. Modifications of Class III preparations, 891
3. Separation of teeth, 891
4. Instrumentation, 892
5. Restoration, 892
Summary, 898

CHAPTER

DIRECT GOLDS AND PRINCIPLES
OF MANIPULATION
Several types of dental restorative materials are currently available. Generally they are grouped into categories such as amalgam materials, cast golds, toothcolored materials, dental porcelains, porcelains fused to
metal, and direct golds. Direct golds are those gold
restorative materials that are manufactured for compaction directly into prepared cavities. Two types of direct golds are manufactured for dental use: gold foil and
powdered gold; they differ in their metallurgic structure.
Pure gold has been in use in dentistry in the United
States for well over 100 years.
A variety of techniques have been advanced for its use in the restoration
of teeth. It is generally agreed that this noble metal is a
superior restorative material for treatment of many
small lesions and defects in teeth, given sound pulpal
and periodontal health. Success is achieved with direct
gold restorations if meticulous care is given to an exacting technique in tooth-preparation design and material
manipulation. Direct gold restorations can last for a lifetime if attention is paid to details of restorative technique and to proper homecare. The longevity of direct
gold restorations is a result of both the superb biocompatibility of gold with the oral environment and its excellent marginal integrity.
It is the purpose of this chapter to discuss the various
forms of direct gold presently available and explain the
principles required for their manipulation. The principles of tooth preparation are reviewed as they are applied to direct gold restorations, and a detailed consideration is given to Class I, Class V, and Class III
preparations and their restoration.

FIG 21-1 A, 4 x 4 inch book of foil
marked for cutting and rolling into
pellets of various sizes. B and C, Corners of foil piece are tucked into center. D, Foil is rolled into a completed
pellet. (A, Courtesy of Terkla and
CantwelQ

21

Direct Gold Restorations

MATERIALS AND MANUFACTURE
There have been several physical types of direct-filling
golds produced." All are "compactable" in that they are
inserted into tooth preparations under force and compacted or condensed into preparation line and point angles and against preparation walls.
Gold foil is manufactured by beating pure gold into thin
sheets. The gold foil is cut into 4 x 4 inch (10 x 10 cm)
sheets and sold in books of sheets, separated by pages of
thin paper. The books contain 1/10 or 1/,, oz of gold. The
sheets of foil that weigh 4 gr each are termed No. 4 foil;
the sheets weighing 3 gr are termed No. 3 foil; and the
sheets weighing 2 gr are termed No. 2 foil. Because the
4 x 4 inch sheets of foil are too large to use in restorative
procedures, they are rolled into cylinders or pellets before insertion into tooth preparations. (The gold foil referred to in the restorative sections of this chapter is in
pellet form.)
Pellets of gold foil are generally rolled from 1/3Z , 1/431/64, or 1/128 -inch sections cut from a No. 4 sheet of foil.
The book of foil is marked and cut into squares or rectangles (Fig. 21-1, A). Each piece is placed on clean fingertips, and the corners are tucked into the center (see
Fig. 21-1, B and C); then it is lightly rolled into pellet
form (see Fig. 21-1, D). In addition, cylinders of gold foil
maybe rolled from segments of a sheet (see Fig. 21-1, A).
After pellets of gold are rolled, they may be conveniently stored in a gold foil box (Fig. 21-2), which is divided into labeled sections for various sizes of pellets.
Cylinders of foil and selected sizes of other types of gold
may also be stored in the box. Preferential contamination is suggested by placing a damp cotton pellet
dipped into 18% ammonia into each section of the box.

C H A P T E R 21

Direct Gold Restorations

This will serve to prevent deleterious oxides from forming on the gold until it is used.
Powdered gold is made by a combination of chemical
precipitation and atomization, with an average particle
size of 15 mm" (see Fig 21-3, A). The atomized particles
are mixed together in wax, cut into pieces, and wrapped
in No. 4 or No. 3 foil (see Fig 21-3, B). Several sizes of
these pellets are available. This product is marketed as
Williams E-Z Gold.
COHESION AND DEGASSING
Direct golds are inserted into tooth preparations under
force. The purpose of the force is to weld the gold into
restorations containing minimal porosity or internal
void spaces.
Welding occurs because pure gold with
an absolutely clean surface will cohere as a result of
metallic bonding. As the gold is forced and compressed
into a tooth preparation, succeeding increments cohere
to those previously placed. For successful welding to
occur during restoration, the gold must be in a cohesive
state before compaction, and a suitable, biologically compatible compacting force must be delivered.
Direct gold may be either cohesive or noncohesive. It is
noncohesive if surface impurities or wax are present
that prevent one increment of gold from cohering to another. The manufacturer supplies books of gold foil or

FIG 21-2 Gold foil box. Compartments are labeled to show
pellet size.

FIG 21-3 Scanning electron photomicrographs of direct-filling golds. A, Spheres of
E-Z Gold, B, Wrapped E-Z pellet that contains spheres. (Courtesy of Ivoclar-Williams
Company, Inc.)

prerolled cylinders in a cohesive or noncohesive state.
E-Z Gold pellets are supplied with a wax coating that
must be burned off before compaction.
Because gold attracts gases that render it noncohesive, such gases must be removed from the surface of
the gold before dental compaction. This process is usually referred to as degassing or annealing and is accomplished by application of heat. Degassing is the preferred term, because the desired result is to remove
residual surface contamination (although further annealing, resulting in additional internal stress relief or
recrystallization, may also occur in this process). All
direct-filling gold products are degassed immediately
before use, except when noncohesive foil is specifically
desired. Underheating during degassing is to be
avoided, because it fails to render the gold surface pure.
Overheating is also to be avoided, because it may cause
the gold to become brittle or melt and render it unusable. Degassing is accomplished by heating the gold foil
on a mica tray over a flame or on an electric annealer or
by heating each piece of gold over a pure ethanol flame
(Fig. 21-4).
The advantage of the technique involving use of the
pure ethanol flame is that each piece of gold is selected
and heated just before insertion, and waste of gold is
avoided. A careful technique is needed to correctly degas an increment of gold in the flame. The gold is passed
into the blue inner core of the flame on the tip of a foil
passing instrument and held just until the gold becomes
dull red; then the instrument is withdrawn from the
flame. After a few seconds are allowed for cooling, the
gold is placed in the preparation.
Although any of the three degassing procedures is
satisfactory for gold foil, this is not the case for E-Z
Gold. The E-Z Gold pellet must be heated 1/2 to 1 inches
above the ethanol flame until a bright flame occurs
(caused by ignition of the wax) and the pellet becomes
dull red for 2 to 3 seconds; then it is withdrawn from
above the flame.
I NCIPLES OF COMPACTION
Direct-filling golds must be compacted during insertion
into tooth preparations .2 With the exception of E-Z
Gold, the compaction takes the form of malleting forces
that are delivered either by a hand mallet used by the

CHAPTER

21

Direct Gold Restorations

FIG 21-4 A, Pellet of gold foil is degassed in pure ethanol flame. B, Mica tray mounted over alcohol lamp for degassing several increments of gold simultaneously. C, Gold foil degassed on
an electric annealer. (Courtesy of Terkla and Cantwell.)

FIG 21-5 A, Hand mallet and condensers used for hand mallet
compaction of direct gold. B, A selection of variously shaped
nibs. Left to right: Three round-faced nibs, oblique-faced nib, foot
condenser, and rounded rectangular nib. (A, Courtesy of Terkla
and Cantwell.)

assistant or by an Electro-Mallet or a pneumatic mallet
used by the dentist. E-Z Gold, because of its powdered
form, may be compacted by heavy hand pressure delivered in a rocking motion with specially designed hand
condensers. Successful malleting of the gold foil may
be achieved with any of the currently available equipment. Some operators prefer the Electro-Mallet or pneumatic mallet because a dental assistant is not required
for the procedure.

A technique preferred by many clinicians uses a hand
mallet to deliver light blows to a condenser held by the
dentist (Fig. 21-5, A). This technique allows great control
of malleting forces when variations are called for, and it
allows for rapid change in condenser nibs, or tips, when
a multitude of condensers is required. In any case a suitable condenser must be stepped over the gold systematically to achieve a dense, well-compacted restoration
(see Fig. 21-8).

CHAPTER

21

Direct Gold Restorations

FIG.

21-7 Compacted gold foil. Linear channels are evident
between creases in the foil pellet. Dark spots are void spaces
i n the compacted mass.

. FIG 21-6 A, Oblique-faced condenser with nib face estab-

lished perpendicular to long axis of handle and perpendicular
to line of force (a). B, Conventional monangle condenser; nib
face is not perpendicular to line of force (b); condenser nib
face is established perpendicular to end portion of shank
rather than perpendicular to handle (c).
Condensers are designed to deliver forces of compaction to direct golds. Condensers used in the handpieces of the Electro-Mallet or pneumatic mallet consist
of a nib, or working tip, and a short shank (approximately 1 inch [2.5 cm] in length) that fits into the malleting handpiece. Condensers used with the hand mallet are longer (approximately 6 inches [15 cm]) and have
a blunt-ended handle that receives light blows from the
hand mallet.
Condenser nibs are available in several shapes and
sizes (see Fig. 21-5, B). All have pyramidal serrations on
the nib faces to prevent slipping on the gold. Those
described in this chapter are: (1) the round condensers,
0.4 to 0.55 mm in diameter; (2) the Varney foot condenser,
which has a rectangular face that is approximately 1 to
1.3 mm, and (3) the parallelogram condensers, which are
used only for hand pressure compaction and have nib
faces that measure approximately 0.5 to 1 mm.
Condenser shanks may be straight, monangled, or offset, and their nib faces may be cut perpendicular to the
long axis of the handle or perpendicular to the end portion of the shank (Fig. 21-6). The smaller the nib face size
(i.e., area), the greater the pounds per square inch delivered (given a constant malleting force). For example, if
the nib diameter is reduced by half, the effective compaction force in pounds per square inch is four times
greater (because the area of a circle is proportional to the
square of the diameter). For most gold, the 0.4- to 0.55mm diameter nibs are suitable. Smaller condensers tend
to punch holes in the gold, whereas larger ones are less
effective in forcing the gold into angles in the tooth
preparation.
Two fundamental principles involved in compaction of
cohesive gold are to: (1) weld the gold into a cohesive
mass and (2) wedge as much gold as possible into the

tooth preparation. 13 Welding takes place primarily as a result of the coherence of a noble metal to itself. Wedging results from careful compacting technique. Regardless of
the technique used, some bridging will occur, resulting in
void spaces not only in the compacted gold but also along
the preparation walls. Success depends on minimizing
these voids, particularly on the surface of the restoration
and at the cavosurface interface where leakage to the internal aspects of the restoration may begin.
Gold foil compacts readily because of its thin form
and produces a mass with isolated linear channels of
microporosity (Fig. 21-7). Because the thin folds of the
gold pellet weld to each other, the remaining channels
of microporosity do not appear to be entirely confluent
with one another.
It is recommended that compaction of E-Z Gold be
done by hand pressure. As compaction is performed,
the bag of atomized gold is opened and the spheres of
gold powder move over one another and against the
preparation walls. Heavy and methodic hand pressure
with the condensers is required to compact this form of
gold effectively.
COMPACTION TECHNIQUE FOR GOLD FOIL
Compaction begins when a piece of gold is placed in a
tooth preparation. The gold is first pressed to place by
hand; then a condenser of suitable size is used to begin
malleting in the center of the mass (often this is done
while this first increment is held in position with a holding instrument). Each succeeding step of the condenser
overlaps (by half) the previous one as the condenser is
moved toward the periphery (Fig. 21-8). The gold
moves under the nib face of the condenser, effecting
compaction as malleting proceeds.
The most efficient compaction occurs directly under
the nib face. Some compaction also occurs by lateral
movement of the gold against surrounding preparation
walls. The result of compaction is to remove most of the
void space from within each increment of gold, to compact the gold into line and point angles and against
walls, and to attach it to any previously placed gold via
the process of cohesion.

CHAPTER

The line of force is important when any gold is compacted. The line of force is that direction through which
the force is delivered (i.e., the direction in which the
condenser is aimed) (Fig 21-9). Specific instructions regarding line of force are given in subsequent sections of
this chapter as they relate to the restorations.
Research has shown that a biologically acceptable
pulpal response occurs after proper direct gold procedures." Care is required when condensing forces are applied to preclude pulpal irritation. The Electro-Mallet is
an acceptable condenser if the manufacturer's instructions for mallet intensity are followed. Correct handmalleting technique requires a light, bouncing application of the mallet to the condenser, rather than the
delivery of heavy blows.
COMPACTION TECHNIQUE FOR E-Z GOLD
Using an amalgam condenser or a gold foil condenser,
the first pellet of E-Z Gold is pressed into the depth of
the tooth preparation and tamped into position. A small
condenser is then selected to thrust and wedge the gold
into opposing line angles and against opposing walls, to
secure the mass in the preparation. Additional pellets
are added (one at a time, banking against the preparation walls) until the entire preparation is filled. To avoid
creation of large void spaces in the restoration, a dense,
fully condensed surface is obtained with each pellet before subsequent pellets are added.

21

Direct Gold Restorations

Diagrammatic order of compaction for increment
of direct-filling gold. Condensers are moved across surface of
gold in an orderly stepping motion. Each succeeding step of
the nib overlaps the previous one by at least half of the nib
face diameter. Condensation begins at position 1 and moves
to the right, then resumes at 2 and repeats movement to the
right. Finally, it continues in rows 3, 4, and 5.

FIG 21-8

PRINCIPLES OF TOOTH
PREPARATION FOR DIRECT
GOLD RESTORATIONS
FUNDAMENTALS OF TOOTH PREPARATION
The principles of tooth preparation for all direct gold
restorations demand meticulous attention to detail for
success. Failure to give attention to outline form may result in an unsightly restoration or, at the least, one in
which cavosurface deficiencies are immediately obvious. Poor resistance form can result in tooth fracture; inadequate retention form may result in a loose restoration that is frustrating to the dentist. Lack of detailed
convenience form may render an otherwise excellent
tooth preparation unrestorable. The preparation must
be smoothed and debrided to permit the first increments of gold to be stabilized.
The margins in outline form must not be ragged. They
are established on sound areas of the tooth that can be
finished and polished. The outline must include all
structural defects associated with the lesion. The marginal outline must be designed to be esthetically pleasing, because the final restoration may be visible.
Resistance form is established by orienting preparation
walls to support the integrity of the tooth, such as a pulpal wall that is flat and perpendicular to occlusal forces.
All enamel must be supported by sound dentin. Opti-

Line of force (a) remains parallel with shaft or
handle of condenser, regardless of any angles in shank of
i nstrument.

FIG 21-9

mally placed axial or pulpal walls promote the integrity
of the restored tooth, thus providing a suitable thickness
of remaining dentin.
The retention form is established by parallelism of
some walls and by strategically placed converging walls
(as will be described in detail for each tooth preparation). In addition, walls must be smooth and flat where
possible (to provide resistance to loosening of the gold
during compaction), and internal line angles must be
sharp (to resist movement). Internal form includes an
initial depth into dentin, ranging from 0.5 mm from the
dentinoenamel junction (DEJ) in Class I preparations to
0.75 mm from the cementum in Class V preparations.
Optimal convenience form requires suitable access and
a dry field provided by the rubber dam. Access may additionally require the use of a gingival retractor for

CHAPTER

21

Direct Gold Restorations

Class V restorations or a separator to provide a minimal
amount of separation (0.5 mm maximum) between anterior teeth for Class III restorations. Sharp internal line
and point angles are created in dentin to allow convenient "starting" gold foil as compaction begins.
Rounded form is permitted when E-Z Gold is used to
begin the restorative phase.
Removal of remaining carious dentin, final planing of
cavosurface margins, and debridement complete the
tooth preparation for direct gold.
I NDICATIONS AND CONTRAINDICATIONS
Class I direct gold restorations are one option for the
treatment of small carious lesions in pits and fissures of
most posterior teeth and the lingual surfaces of anterior
teeth. Direct gold is also indicated for treatment of
small, cavitated Class V carious lesions or for the
restoration, when indicated, of abraded, eroded, or
abfraction areas on the facial surfaces of teeth (although
access to the molars is a limiting factor). Class III direct
gold restorations can be used on the proximal surfaces
of anterior teeth where the lesions are small enough to
be treated with esthetically pleasing results. Class II direct gold restorations are an option for restoration of
small cavitated proximal surface carious lesions in posterior teeth in which marginal ridges are not subjected
to heavy occlusal forces (e.g., the mesial or distal surfaces of mandibular first premolars and the mesial surface of some maxillary premolars). Class VI direct gold
restorations may be used on incisal edges or cusp tips.
A defective margin of an otherwise acceptable cast gold
restoration also may be repaired with direct golds.
Direct gold restorations are contraindicated in some
teeth with very large pulp chambers, in severely periodontally weakened teeth with questionable prognosis,
when economics is a severely limiting factor, and in
handicapped patients who are unable to sit for the long
dental appointments required for this procedure. Root
canal filled teeth are generally not restored with direct
gold because these teeth are brittle, although in some

cases gold may be the material of choice to close access
preparations (for root canal therapy) in cast gold
restorations.
TOOTH PREPARATIONS
AND RESTORATIONS
The following section presents the preparation and the
restoration of Classes I, V and III lesions. The preparations described may be restored entirely with pellets of
gold foil, or E-Z Gold may be used. If powdered gold is
selected, heavy hand pressure compaction may be substituted for hand mallet or automatic mallet techniques.
Classes I and V E-Z Gold restorations may be veneered
with gold foil pellets, if desired. (The Class III tooth
preparation discussed in this chapter is recommended
by Ferrier, and only pellets of gold foil are used for the
restoration.)
All tooth preparations and restorative procedures are
accomplished after a suitable field of operation has been
achieved (usually by application of the rubber dam).
CLASS I TOOTH PREPARATION
AND RESTORATION
Tooth Preparation Design. The marginal outline form
for the Class I tooth preparation for compacted gold is
extended to include the lesion on the tooth surface
treated, as well as any fissured enamel. The preparation
outline may be a simple circular design for a pit defect,
or it may be oblong, triangular, or a more extensive form
(if needed to treat a defective fissure) (Fig. 21-10, A).
Preparation margins are placed beyond the extent of
pits and fissures. All noncoalesced enamel and structural defects are removed; the outline is kept as small as
possible, consistent with provision of suitable access for
instrumentation and for manipulation of gold.
For Class I tooth preparations, the external walls of
the preparation are parallel to each other. However, in
extensive occlusal preparations, the mesial or distal wall
or walls (or both) may diverge slightly occlusally to
avoid undermining and weakening marginal ridges.

FIG 21-10 A, Typical Class I occlusal marginal outlines for pit restorations with direct gold.
B, Cross-section of model of lingual Class I preparation on maxillaty incisor. Undercuts (a and b)
are placed in dentin incisally and gingivally for additional retention.

CHAPTER

The pulpal wall is of uniform depth, parallel with the
plane of the surface treated, and established at 0.5 mm
into the dentin. The pulpal wall meets the external walls
at a slightly rounded angle created by the shape of the
bur. Small undercuts may be placed in the dentin if additional retentive features are required to provide convenience form in beginning the compaction of gold (see
Fig. 21-10, B). Undercuts, when desired, are placed facially and lingually in posterior teeth (or incisally and
gingivally on the lingual surface of incisors) at the level
of the ideal pulpal floor position. These undercut line
angles must not undermine marginal ridges. A very
slight cavosurface bevel may be placed to: (1) create a
30- to 40-degree metal margin for ease in finishing the
gold and (2) remove remaining rough enamel. The bevel
is not greater than 0.2 mm in width and is placed with a
white rotary stone or suitable finishing bur.
I nstrumentation. For description and illustration,
the preparation of a carious pit on the mandibular first
premolar is presented (Fig. 21-11, A). By use of a highspeed handpiece with air-water spray, the No. 330 or
No. 329 bur is aligned and the outline form (which
includes the limited initial depth) is established (see
Fig. 21-11, B). When the preparation is extensive because
of including fissured enamel, a small hoe, 6 1/2 -2 1/2- 9, 'may
be used to complete the desired degree of flatness of the
pulpal wall. Using the No. 33 1/2 bur at low speed, small
retentive undercuts are prepared into the dentin portion
of the external walls at the initial pulpal wall depth;
these also may be prepared using a 6 1/2-(90)-2 1/2-9
angle-former chisel. Round burs of suitable size are
used to remove any infected carious dentin that remains
on the pulpal wall. The preparation is completed by finishing the cavosurface with an angle former, a small

FIG. 21-11

Class I preparation for direct
gold. A, Preoperative view of pit lesion.
B, A No. 330 bur is aligned properly for
occlusal preparation. C, Occlusal cavosurface bevel is prepared with white
stone. D, The bevel may be placed with
an angle former. E, Completed tooth
preparation.

21

Direct Gold Restorations

finishing bur (e.g., No. 7802), or a flame-shaped white
stone (see Fig. 21-11, C through E).
Restoration. The restorative phase begins with insertion of a pellet of E-Z Gold or gold foil. The gold is first
degassed in the alcohol flame, cooled momentarily in
air, and inserted into the preparation with the passing
instrument. The gold is pressed to place with the nib of
a small round condenser. In larger preparations, a pair
of condensers is used for this initial stabilization of the
gold. Next, compaction of the gold begins with a line of
force directed against the pulpal wall (Fig. 21-12, A).
Hand pressure is used for E-Z Gold; malleting is used
for gold foil. The gold is compacted into the pulpal line
angles and against the external walls, and the line of
force is changed to a 45-degree angle to the pulpal and
respective external walls (to best compact the gold
against the internal walls) (see Fig. 21-12, B). Additional
increments of gold are added, and the procedure is repeated until the preparation is about three-quarters full
of compacted gold. If E-Z Gold is to be the final restoration surface, compaction is continued until the restoration is slightly overfilled.
If gold foil is selected to veneer this restoration, then
pellets of suitable size are selected; in larger preparations large pellets are convenient, whereas for small pit
preparations the operator should begin with'/64 size pellets (Fig. 21-13). The pellet is degassed and carried to the
preparation. First, hand pressure compaction is used to
secure the pellet against the compacted E-Z Gold and
spread it over the surface; then mallet compaction is
used. Likewise each succeeding pellet is hand compacted and then mallet compacted. The condenser point
is systematically stepped over the gold twice as malleting proceeds. Generally the line of force is perpendicu-

CHAPTER 21

Direct Gold Restorations

FIG 21-12 A, Compaction forces are delivered by condenser held at 90-degree angle
to pulpal wall. B, Gold is condensed against
external preparation walls.

21-13 Placement of pellet of gold foil and compaction
i nto tooth preparation.

FIG 21-14 Compaction of gold foil has proceeded sufficiently

lar to the pulpal floor in the center of the mass and at a
45-degree angle to the pulpal floor as the external walls
are reached. At this stage and during all building of the
restoration, the compacted surface should be saucer
shaped, with the compaction of gold on the external
walls slightly ahead of the center. The surface should
never be convex in the center, because this may result in
voids in the gold and poor adaptation of the gold along
the external walls when the condenser nib is "crowded
out" along the wall by the center convexity. Continue
building the restoration until the cavosurface margin is
covered with foil (Fig. 21-14). Exercise extreme care that

restorations. Care must be taken at this stage to avoid
abrading the surface enamel. After use of the cleoiddiscoid, a small round finishing bur (No. 9004) is used
to begin polishing (see Fig. 21-15, C. It is followed by
the application of flour of pumice and tin oxide or white
rouge (see Fig. 21-15, D). These powdered abrasives are
applied dry, with a webless, soft-rubber cup in a lowspeed handpiece. Care is taken to use light pressure.
Gentle blasts of air cool the surface during polishing.
The completed restoration is illustrated in Figure 21-16.

FIG

to cover all cavosurface margins.

gold is always present between the condenser face and the
cavosurface margin; otherwise the condenser may injure

CLASS V TOOTH PREPARATION
AND RESTORATION
The Operating Field. As with all direct gold restora-

(i.e., fracture) the enamel margin. Now fill in the central
area of the restoration's surface to the desired level.
Tooth surface contour of the gold is created to simulate
the final anatomic form, and a slight excess of gold is
compacted on the surface to allow for the finishing and
polishing procedures.
The first step in the finishing procedure is to burnish
the gold (Fig. 21-15, A). A flat beaver-tail burnisher is
used with heavy hand pressure to harden the surface
gold. A cleoid-discoid carver is used to continue the
burnishing process and remove excess gold on the cavosurface margin. The cleoid, always directed so that a
portion of the working edge is over or resting on enamel
adjacent to or near the margins, is pulled from gold to
tooth across the surface. This is done to smooth the surface and trim away excess gold (see Fig. 21-15, B). If considerable excess gold has been compacted, a green stone
may be necessary to remove the excess in Class I

tions, the rubber dam must be in place to provide a suitable, dry field for a Class V restoration. Furthermore, for
lesions near the gingiva or that extend into the gingival
sulcus, it is necessary to provide appropriate access to
the lesion by placing a No. 212 retainer or gingival retractor. The punching of the rubber dam is modified to
provide ample rubber between the teeth and to provide
enough rubber for coverage and retraction of the soft
tissue on the facial side of the tooth. The hole for the
tooth to be treated is punched 1 mm facial of its normal
position, and an extra 1 mm of dam is left between the
hole for the treated tooth and the holes for the immediately adjacent teeth.
Several modifications may be made to the No. 212 retainer to facilitate its use. If the notches that are engaged
by the retainer forceps are shallow, they may be deepened slightly with a large, carbide fissure bur to provide
a more secure lock for the forceps (Fig. 21-17, A). If the

CHAPTER 21

Direct Gold Restorations

FIG

21-15 Steps in finishing Class I direct gold restoration. A, Burnisher work
hardens the surface gold. B, Cleoid-discoid removes excess gold from cavosurface margins. C, A No. 9004 bur is used
to begin polishing phase. D, Polishing
abrasives are applied with rubber cup.

FIG 21-17

A, Notches are deepened for
secure holding of the No. 212 retainer.
B, Jaws may be modified with a disc to facilitate retainer placement on rotated
teeth.

tips of the retainer jaws are very sharp, they may be
slightly rounded with a garnet disc and then polished
to avoid scratching cementum during placement. For
application to narrow teeth (e.g., mandibular incisors),
the facial and lingual jaws may be narrowed by grinding with a heatless stone or carborundum disc, after
which they are polished with a rubber wheel. To expedite placement on rotated teeth, the jaws may be modified by grinding suitable contour to the tip edge (see
Fig. 21-17, B). The jaws may be bent for use on teeth
where gingival access to lesions is difficult. This is done
by heating the jaws to a cherry red color in a flame, then
grasping the entire facial jaw with suitable pliers and
slightly bending the jaw apically. The procedure is re-

peated for the lingual jaw, bending it slightly occlusally
(Fig. 21-18).
The No. 212 retainer must be carefully applied to
avoid damage to the soft or hard tissue. The retainer is
secured in the retainer forceps and carried to the mouth
after the rubber dam has been placed. The lingual jaw is
positioned just apical to the lingual height of contour,
and the index finger is placed against the jaw to prevent
its movement. The retainer is rotated faciogingivally
with the forceps, while the thumb retracts the dam; then
the facial jaw is set against the tooth (Fig. 21-19, A). Next
a ball burnisher is placed into one of the retainer notches
and used to move the facial jaw gingivally (without
scraping the jaw against the tooth) to the final position

CHAPTER

21

Direct Gold Restorations

A, Drawing of a No. 212 retainer as received from
the manufacturer. B, Modified facial and lingual jaws.

FIG .21-18

Placement of No. 212 retainer. A, Initial placement of facial jaw after first placing lingual jaw. B, Use of ball burnisher to carry facial jaw to final position. C, Retainer stabilized with
compound to distribute compaction forces, prevent tipping, and prevent either apical or occlusal movement of retainer.

FIG 21-19

Facial view of Class V tooth preparation for direct
gold. Occlusal and gingival margins are straight, parallel with
each other, and extend mesially and distally to respective
mesiofacial and distofacial tooth crown line angles. Mesial and
distal walls diverge facially and form obtuse angles with axial
wall. Line angles and point angles are sharp (see Fig. 21-22, B).

FIG 21-20

0.5 to 1 mm apical of the expected gingival margin)
(see Fig. 21-19, B). Gentle pressure is used to position
the facial jaw so that only the free gingiva is retracted
and the epithelial attachment is not harmed. The retainer is supported and locked into this desired position
with compound, which is softened, molded by the fin(i.e.,

gers, and placed between the bows and the gingival embrasures (see Fig. 21-19, C). The compound also serves
to distribute compaction forces among all the teeth included in the retainer application. (Also see application
of the No. 212 retainer in Chapters 10, 12, and 18.)
Tooth Preparation Design. The typical Class V tooth
preparation for restoration with direct gold is trapezoidal (Figs. 21-20, 21-21, and 21-22). This outline form
is created to satisfy both esthetic needs and requirements for retention and convenience forms in the treatment of lesions in the gingival third of the clinical
crowns of teeth. The straight occlusal margin improves
the esthetic result, and by virtue of its straight design,
excess gold is readily discerned and removed in the final stages of the restorative process. The gingival outline is shorter than the occlusal, because the tooth narrows in the gingival area. In addition, it is prepared
parallel with the occlusal margin for easy identification
in finishing phases. The mesial and distal margins connect the gingival margin to the occlusal margin.
The occlusal margin is straight and parallel with the
occlusal plane of the teeth in the arch (see Figs. 21-20
and 21-21); it is extended occlusally to include the lesion. (When several adjacent teeth are restored, some
additional extension is permissible to create a uniform
level that may be more esthetically pleasing.) Often the
mesiodistal extension to the line angles of the tooth will
place the junction of the occlusal and mesial and distal

CHAPTER

21

Direct Gold Restorations

21-21
Facioocclusal view of design of gingival wall in
Class V preparation for direct gold. Axiogingival line angle is
acute and was prepared at expense of gingival wall. This gingival margin is on cementum. If on enamel, the gingival cavosurface would be beveled slightly (see Fig. 21-26, E).
FIG.

FIG 21-22 A, Clinical Class V tooth preparation. Note
proper isolation of operating field. This gingival margin
i s on cementum. B, Longitudinal section, facioocclusal
view, and cross-section. Line and point angles are
sharp.

margins gingival to the crest of the free gingiva, rendering the most esthetic result. The gingival margin is also
straight, parallel with the occlusal margin, placed only
far enough apically to include the lesion, and extends
mesiodistally to the line angles of the tooth.
The mesial and distal margins are parallel to the proximal line angles of the tooth (see Fig. 21-22, A) and usually are positioned sufficiently mesially and distally (respectively) to be covered by the free gingiva. The mesial
and distal margins are straight lines that meet the occlusal margin in sharp, acute angles and meet the gingi-

val margin in sharp, obtuse angles, both of which complete the trapezoidal form.
The depth of the axial wall varies with the position of
the preparation on the tooth. The axial wall is approximately 1 mm deep in the occlusal half of the preparation. As the outline approaches the cervical line, the axial wall depth may decrease from 1 to 0.75 mm. The
axial wall must be established in dentin, and occlusogingivally it should be relatively flat and parallel (approximately) with the facial surface of the tooth (see
Fig. 21-22, B). Mesiodistally, the axial wall is also

CHAPTER 21

Direct Gold Restorations

prepared approximately parallel with the surface contour
of the tooth. This contour may create a slight mesiodistal
curvature in the axial wall in both convex contoured teeth
and where the preparation is extensive proximally.
Mesiodistal curvature of the axial wall prevents encroachment of the tooth preparation on the pulp. Excessive axial curvature results in a preparation that is either
too shallow in the center or too deep at the proximal extensions, and it further complicates restoration by failing
to provide a reasonably flat wall against which to begin
compaction. A subaxial wall may be created within the
axial wall to remove infected caries that has progressed
deeper than the ideal axial wall placement.
The occlusoaxial internal line angle is a sharp right
angle. The occlusal wall also forms a right angle with
the external enamel surface, thus precluding undermining of the enamel. The gingivoaxial internal line angle is
a sharp, acute angle, created at the expense of the gingival wall (see Fig. 21-22, B). The mesioaxial and distoaxial internal line angles are sharp, obtuse angles. These
obtuse line angles are created to prevent the undermining of the mesial and distal enamel, although still providing some resistance to movement of the gold during
compaction. They must never be acute angles.
The mesial and distal prepared walls are flat and
straight. They meet the occlusal wall in a sharp, acute
line angle and meet the gingival wall in a sharp, obtuse
line angle. The mesial and distal walls provide resistance
for gold compaction, but they provide no retention.
The orientation of the gingival wall is the key to the
retention form of the preparation. It is straight mesiodistally, meeting the mesial and distal walls in sharp line
angles. Retention is provided by sloping the gingival
wall internally to meet the axial wall in a sharply defined acute line angle. Retention is thereby provided by
the facial convergence of the occlusal and gingival
walls. Gold wedged between these two walls is locked
into the tooth.
If the gingival margin is established on enamel, the
cavosurface is beveled slightly to remove the unsupported enamel (see Fig. 21-26, E). When placed on cementum, the gingival cavosurface is not beveled (see
Fig. 21-24, B).
The outline of the preparation may be modified. In
those clinical situations demanding reduced display of
gold, such as in anterior teeth, the incisal outline may be

FIG 21-24 A, Failing Class V amalgam
restoration. B, Replacement direct gold
restoration.

curved to follow the contour of the soft tissue mesiodistally (Fig. 21-23). This modification is made only when
required, because preparation instrumentation and finishing of gold are more difficult than when a straight
marginal outline is created. A similar modification may
be made in the occlusal outline when caries extends
more occlusally as the proximal extensions are reached.
Also the mesiodistal extension (i.e., dimension) of a
preparation may be limited when caries is minimal,
thus conserving intact tooth structure. When access requires, the gingival wall may be modified to also curve
mesiodistally to include the gingival extent of advanced
caries. The entire axial wall should not be extended pulpally to the depth of the lesion when deep cervical abrasion, abfraction, or erosion is treated; rather the axial
wall is positioned normally, leaving a remaining V
notch at its center to be restored with gold. When failing
restorations are removed and restored with direct gold,
the preparation outline is partially dictated by the previous restoration (Fig. 21-24).
I nstrumentation. The No. 33 1/2 bur is used to establish the general outline form of the preparation. The end
of the bur establishes the distal wall (Fig. 21-25, A); the
side establishes the axial depth and the occlusal, gingival, and the mesial walls (see Fig. 21-25, B). When access
permits, the end of the bur may be used to establish the
mesial and gingival walls (see Fig. 21-25, C and D). The

FIG 21-23 Completed Class V gold restoration. Incisal margin
curved to follow contour of gingival tissue for best esthetic
result.

CHAPTER

gingival and mesial walls may be prepared with the side
of the bur if access so dictates (see Fig. 21-25, E and F).
The end of the bur is used to place the axial wall in
dentin (see Fig. 21-25, G).
The 6 1/2-2 1/2-9 hoe or the larger 10-4-8 hoe is useful for
planing preparation walls, establishing sharp internal
line angles (Fig. 21-26, A), and finishing margins. The
Wedelstaedt chisel is used to finish the occlusal cavosurface margin (see Fig. 21-26, B) and also may be used
to plane the axial wall.

21

Direct Gold Restorations

The acute axiogingival angle is established with
the 6 1/2-2 1/2-9 hoe, cutting from the cavosurface to
the axial wall in a push-cut stroke (see Fig. 21-26, C.
The chips of dentin produced at the axiogingival
angle may be removed with the tip of an explorer
(see Fig. 21-26, D) or the point of a 6 1/2-(90)-2 1/2-9 small
angle former. Care must be taken not to gouge the
axial wall. When its use is indicated, the gingival
bevel is prepared with the Wedelstaedt chisel or a hoe
(Fig. 21-26, E).

FIG 21-25 Use of No. 33
1/ 2 bur in straight handpiece for initiating Class V preparation. A, End
of bur is used to establish distal wall. B, Side of bur is used to establish occlusal wall. C, End of
bur prepares mesial wall if access permits. D, End of bur is used to establish gingival wall if ac
cess permits.

Continued

H A P T E R Z1

Direct Gold Restorations

FIG . 21-25, cont'd E, Preparation of gingival wall with side of bur. F, Preparation of mesial wall
with side of bur. G, The end of bur may be used to establish initial axial wall depth in dentin.

Restoration. Restoration of the Class V preparation
begins with application of cavity varnish (if desired), after which a piece of degassed E-Z Gold is placed into the
preparation. The gold is first degassed in the alcohol
flame and then carried to place in the preparation with
the passing instrument. Parallelogram foil condensers
or other suitable serrated condensers are used to firmly
force the gold against the axial wall and to wedge it into
the line angles. Then one instrument may be put aside
(and the other is used as a holding instrument to prevent movement of the entire piece of gold), and compaction can begin by delivering heavy compacting
forces to the gold.
Once stabilized, completion of compaction of the initial mass of gold begins in the center of the mass with a
0.5-mm diameter, round, serrated condenser nib. Careful, methodic stepping of the gold proceeds outward toward the external walls (to wedge the gold in the tooth
and remove internal voids). As soon as the gold is stabilized, a holding instrument is unnecessary. As the walls
are reached, a line of force of 45 degrees to the axial wall
is used to drive the gold into the line angles and against
the external walls. The entire surface of the gold is condensed twice to complete compaction of the gold. Additional increments of E-Z Gold are added until the prepa-

ration is filled to at least half its depth. E-Z Gold pellets are
then used to complete the restoration covering the margins
first, and then to complete compacting in the center of the
facial surface. Pellets of gold foil may also be used to complete the outer one half of the restoration (Fig. 21-27).
If gold foil is used for the outer one half of the restoration, compaction proceeds with medium-sized pellets at
the mesioocclusal or distoocclusal line angle and then
across the occlusal wall. The entire wall and occlusal
cavosurface margin are covered with compacted gold
foil (see Fig. 21-27, A). To ensure that gold protects the
margin from blows of the condenser face, care should be
exercised when the condenser approaches any enamel
margin. Next the gingival, mesial, and distal walls are
covered, which leaves the restoration concave (see
Fig. 21-27, B). It is essential that all cavosurface margins
be covered at this time, before the final convex surface
of the restoration is formed.
Medium and large pellets (sizes 1/ 43 and '/ z ) are then
compacted in the center of the restoration to complete
the formation of the appropriate contour. A slight excess
contour is developed and is removed later when the
gold is finished and polished. Any small remaining deficiencies in the surface contour are filled with small pellets. A Varney foot condenser (or other large condenser)

CHAPTER 21

Direct Gold Restorations

FIG 21-26 Use of hand instruments in Class V tooth preparation. A, Small hoe planes preparati on walls. B, Wedelstaedt chisel refines occlusal wall and margin. C, Small hoe creates acute
axiogingival line angle in dentin. D, Explorer is used to remove debris from completed preparation. E, Chisel blade bevels gingival cavosuface margin when indicated. (E, From Howard WC,
Moller RC. Atlas of operative dentistry, St Louis, 1981, Mosby.)

CHAPTER

21

Direct Gold Restorations

FIG 21-27 Completion of compaction where gold foil is used to overlay the E-Z Gold. A, Condensation of foil proceeds to cover cavosurface margins. A slight excess of gold has been condensed over mesial half of occlusal cavosurface margin. B, All cavosurface margins are covered
with a slight excess of gold. Restoration at this stage of insertion is concave. C, After additional
foil pellets are compacted in central area to form convex restoration surface with slight excess,
a foot condenser is used to confirm condensation.

Finishing the Class V
restoration. A, Burnisher work hardens surface. B, Small, fine garnet disc
removes excess gold contour. C, Gold
knife's secondary edge used with
push-stroke (arrow) removes excess
gold from gingival margin. D, After final surfacing with cuttle discs, any remaining marginal excess is removed
with cleoid carver.

FIG 21-28

is malleted over the entire surface to make it smooth
and assist in detection of any poorly compacted areas
(see Fig. 21-27, C).
Finishing begins with application of a beaver-tail
burnisher to work harden and smooth the surface
(Fig. 21-28, A). Petroleum jelly may be applied to the
dam to avoid abrasion from discs; it also may be applied to the discs. Gross excess contour, if any, is removed with a fine garnet disc applied with a Sproule or
other suitable mandrel in a low-speed handpiece (see
Fig. 21-28, B). Excess gold is removed from the cavosurface margins with the cleoid-discoid instrument (using pull-cut strokes) or the gold knife (using only pushand-cut strokes from gold to tooth) (see Fig. 21-28, C
and D). When removing excess gold over the gingival margin, care is exercised not to remove cementum or "ditch" the
root surface (especially when using rotary instruments).
Once final contour has been obtained, cuttle discs
may be used in decreasing abrasiveness (i.e., coarse to

medium to fine) to ready the surface for final polishing. These discs and the cleoid are helpful in removing
very fine fins of gold from margins. Polishing is performed with fine pumice followed by tin oxide or
white rouge (applied with a soft, webless rubber cup).
Care is also required at this stage to avoid ditching the cementum with the polishing abrasive. Therefore the abrasives are used dry so that the field may be kept clean
and the exact position of the rubber cup can be seen at
all times (Fig. 21-29).
After polishing, the No. 212 retainer and rubber dam
are removed. Removal of the retainer is best accomplished with the forceps firmly locked into the notches
on the retainer. The retainer jaws are opened from the
tooth with the forceps and carefully removed occlusally
(without scratching the restoration or the surface enamel
of the tooth). The gingival sulcus is rinsed and examined
to ascertain that it is free of debris. The soft tissue is massaged gently before the patient is dismissed.

CHAPTER 21

Direct Gold Restorations

FIG 21-29 A, Soft-rubber cup is used to
apply polishing abrasives. B, Explorer is
used to remove any remaining polishing
powder from site of completed restoration.

FIG 21-30 Class III direct gold restoration. A, Model of preparation demonstrates esthetic marginal outline (a).
B, Central incisor (b) before distal preparation. C, Completed Class III restoration.

CLASS III TOOTH PREPARATION
AND RESTORATION
Many styles of Class III preparations are advocated for
use with direct gold. Some preparations are based on
the lingual approach and are restored with E-Z Gold.
Others may be instrumented from either the facial or
lingual surface and use gold foil as the restorative material. The outline form selected must provide adequate
access for placing the restoration, as well as developing
an acceptable esthetic result. Although the preparation
design presented in subsequent sections was first described by Ferrier in the early years of the twentieth century, it is still used today. It has the advantage not only
of conserving tooth structure, but also of providing access for compaction of gold foil directly against all
preparation walls and cavosurface margins. This results
in a dense, esthetically pleasing result (if careful attention is given to management of the outline design). This
preparation is instrumented primarily from a facial approach, although lingual instrumentation may be used
in maxillary teeth. The preparation may be modified for
mandibular anterior teeth, the distal surface of maxillary canines, and the distal surface of some lateral
incisors.

Tooth Preparation Design for Maxillary Incisors.

The marginal outline is most important. From a facial
view the gingival four fifths of the facial margin is
straight and (generally) parallel with the contour of the
tooth (Fig. 21-30). The facial margin forms a gentle
curve in its incisal one fifth to blend with the incisal
margin. When viewed from a proximofacial aspect, the
facial outline follows the general contour of the adjacent
tooth (Fig. 21-31) and meets the gingival outline in a
slightly obtuse angle. This juncture may be curved very
slightly to enhance esthetics.
The gingival margin is critical to the entire preparation. Its
faciolingual length dictates the remainder of the preparation. Where possible, the gingival margin is established just apical to the crest of the free gingiva to enhance the esthetic result. It is straight faciolingually and
is approximately at a right angle to the long axis of the
tooth. It meets the facial margin in a sharply defined obtuse angle that may be rounded slightly (as previously
described), and it meets the lingual margin in a sharply
defined acute angle.
Viewed from the lingual, the lingual margin generally
parallels the long axis of the tooth (Fig. 21-32). However,
it may diverge slightly proximally from the long axis to

CHAPTER

21

Direct Gold Restorations

FIG 21-33

Lingual marginal outline of Class III preparation.
A, View of lingual outline. Note sharp linguogingival angle.
B, Proximal view of preparation. Note linguogingival angle is
sharp and acute in this view. (A, From Stibbs GD: Direct golds
in dental restorative therapy, Oper Dent 5!31:107, 1980.1
FIG 2l-31

Proximofacial view of Class III preparation.

FIG 21-34 View of incisal retention in Class III preparation.
Undercut is placed in dentin but does not undermine enamel.

FIG. 21-32

Lingual view of Class III preparation.

more nearly parallel the proximal contour. It meets the
gingival margin in a sharply defined angle that is nearly
90 degrees when viewed from the lingual (Fig. 21-33),
but it is acute when viewed from the proximal. The lingual margin is straight in its gingival two thirds, but
then it curves abruptly to meet the incisal margin.
The incisal margin is placed incisally to the contact
area to provide access to the preparation; however, it is
not extended enough to weaken the incisal angle of the
tooth. It forms a smooth curve that connects the facial
and the lingual margins of the preparation.
To provide suitable resistance form, the internal aspects of the preparation are precisely instrumented. The
gingival wall is flat faciolingually. The axial wall is flat
faciolingually and incisogingivally, and it is established

0.5 mm into the dentin. Resistance form is also created
by establishing sharp, obtuse axiofacial and axiolingual
line angles in dentin. The facial and lingual walls diverge only enough to remove undermined enamel, yet
they provide firm, flat walls against which the gold can
be compacted.
As in the Class V restoration, retention form is provided only between the gingival and incisal walls. In the
Class III preparation the dentinal portion of the gingival
wall (as in the Class V gingival wall) slopes apically inward to create an acute axiogingival line angle. However, in the Class III preparation the incisal portion is
undercut (Fig. 21-34). This undercut is placed in dentin,
facioincisally, to create a mechanical lock between the
incisal and gingival walls. This increased retention form
in the Class III preparation is required because of the
length of the preparation incisogingivally and because
of the difficulty of access in compacting the gold.
Provision for convenience form is made by the abrupt
incisolingual curve (which permits introduction of a
condenser directed toward the gingival wall), by adequate clearance of all margins from the adjacent tooth,
and by placement of sharp internal point angles suitable
for beginning compaction of gold. The facioaxiogingival

CHAPTER 21

Direct Gold Restorations

III preparation i nternal
form and facial marginal outline. A, Incisal
view of cross-section of preparation in
plane x shown in B. Facial and lingual cavosurface bevels are shown placed in enamel.
B, Facial view of facial marginal outline of
preparation. (From Stibbs GD: Direct golds
in dental restorative therapy, Oper Dent

FIG 21-35 Class

5131:107, 1980.)

and linguoaxiogingival point angles may be enlarged
slightly to assist in initial stages of foil compaction, if
desired.'-'
The finishing of enamel walls requires placement of a facial, incisal, and lingual cavosurface bevel, which determines the final marginal outline. This bevel is made
with hand instruments and is established totally in
enamel. It is designed to create maximum convenience
form, to remove all surface irregularities and any unsupported enamel, and to establish a more esthetically
pleasing result (Fig. 21-35; see also Fig. 21-30).
Modifications of Class III Preparations. The distal
surface of maxillary canines may require a modification
in preparation design for convenience in gold compaction. Because a highly convex surface is generally
present, it is often desirable to create a "straight-line
preparation" in which the facial outline appears as a
slice. This modification provides clearance from the
mesial marginal ridge of the first premolar and provides
considerable convenience form to allow compaction of
gold on the gingival wall directly from an incisal position. This type of preparation is also appropriate for
the distal surface of highly contoured lateral incisors
(Fig. 21-36).
The mandibular incisors require a modified Class III
preparation because of their small size and because access from a lingual position may be exceptionally difficult. The lingual wall is created in one plane, and extension of both the lingual and incisal walls is limited. The
axiolingual line angle will be a right or slightly obtuse
angle. Care is taken to avoid lingual overextension of
the lingual wall, because this can result in removal of
dentin support for the lingual enamel; thereby rendering the preparation unrestorable by direct gold. Outline
form is extended lingually only far enough to include
the lesion and to allow access for finishing of the gold.
Incisal extension is restricted because the proximal contact area between mandibular incisors is often near the
incisal angle. Extension incisally past the contact may

FIG 21-36 Direct gold restoration of a clinical Class III preparation of straight line design on distal portion of maxillary lateral incisor.

weaken this critical area of the tooth; thus a mechanical
separator may be necessary to obtain clearance between
the teeth. This provides access for both tooth preparation and gold compaction. Facial extension is similar to
the maxillary preparation (Fig. 21-37).
Internally the incisal retentive angle for the mandibular Class III preparation is placed directly incisally,
rather than facioincisally as in maxillary teeth. This
modification is made to conserve the thickness of the
tooth structure at the facioincisal angle, where wear of
mandibular anterior teeth frequently occurs.
Lingual approach Class III restorations may be made
using E-Z Gold. In such cases the lingual "slot" type of
preparation is made with rounded internal line angles.
Separation of Teeth. Separation of teeth is frequently
needed for instrumentation or finishing procedures performed on Class III direct gold restorations. The Ferrier
separator is a convenient instrument for accomplishing
this separation. It is applied and stabilized with compound (similar to stabilization of a No. 212 retainer)
(Fig. 21-38). The jackscrews of the separator are activated with the separator wrench to slightly draw the
teeth apart, thus creating a maximum space of 0.25 to
0.5 mm. It is desirable to provide only this minimum
separation and to remove the separator as soon as possible (preventing damage to periodontal structures).

CHAPTER 21

Direct Gold Restorations

FIG 21-38 Separator placed before clinical Class III preparation for mandibular incisor.
I nstrumentation. The No. 331/ bur (or a suitable
Wedelstaedt chisel) is used to begin the preparation
(Fig. 21-39). The bur is angled from the facial to position
the gingival outline and the facial wall. A Wedelstaedt
chisel establishes the lingual extension, and the No. 33 1/2
bur then defines the linguogingival line angle (Fig. 2140) and completes the gingival floor preparation. The
outline form is then completed by beveling the cavosurface areas with a Wedelstaedt chisel. The dentinal part
of the gingival, lingual, facial, and incisal walls are next
planed. A small hoe (i.e., 6 1/2-21/2 -9) is used for the lingual
and gingival walls (Fig. 21-41). An angle former is used
to plane the facial dentinal wall (Fig. 21-42). An axial plane
(i.e., 8-1-23) smoothes the axial wall, and a bibeveled
hatchet (i.e., 3-2-28) establishes the incisal retentive angle
with a chopping motion (Fig. 21-43). Small angle formers
are used to complete the sharp facioaxiogingival and linguoaxiogingival point angles, as well as the slightly acute
axiogingival angle (Fig. 21-44). The point angles may be
further enlarged with the No. 33S bur (i.e., end-cutting
bur) for additional convenience form. The Wedelstaedt
chisel may be used again to complete the final planing of
the cavosurface margins (Fig. 21-45).

Restoration. The separator is used to obtain a separation of 0.25 to 0.5 mm. Compaction of gold foil begins
at the linguoaxiogingival point angle (Fig. 21-46). A
small (i.e., 0.4 mm) monangle condenser is used to compact the gold, which is held by a small holding instrument. Pellets size %, or 1/128, are used in the beginning of
the restorative phase. The line of force is directed over
the facial surface of the adjacent tooth and into the linguoaxiogingival point angle (see Fig. 21-46, B). As soon
as ample gold has been compacted into the linguogingival area to cover the linguogingival shoulder, compaction continues across the gingival wall (Fig. 21-47)
and into the faciogingival angle. The offset condenser
(with a faciogingival line of force) is used to fill the facioaxiogingival point angle (Fig. 21-48). Compaction of
gold at the linguogingival area is next confirmed with
the oblique-faced monangle condenser (i.e., 0.5 mm)
from the linguoincisal position (Fig. 21-49). Failure to
provide dense gold in this linguogingival area at this
stage may result in a void at the linguogingival angle,
and subsequently, may lead to restoration failure.
The bulk of the restoration is now compacted with
1/43 or 1/32sized pellets, mainly from a facial (occasionally from a lingual) direction (Fig. 21-50).
The line of force is maintained in an axiogingival
direction with the 0.5-mm monangle or oblique-faced
monangle condenser (see Fig. 21-50, B). This requires
that the incisal surface of the growing restoration always slopes apically, with the gold on the axial wall
ahead of the proximal surface of the restoration. During
the compaction procedure, the vector of the line of force
should always be toward the internal portion of the
preparation to prevent dislodgment of the restoration.
The next step is the restoration of the incisal portion
of the preparation, referred to as "making the turn." It is
Text continued on p. 897

CHAPTER

21

Direct Gold Restorations

FIG 21-39 A, Preoperative view of extracted maxillary central incisor that has
been mounted in dentoform. Distal surface to be treated with Class III cavity
preparation and restoration of compacted gold. B, Preoperative lingual view.
C, Facial approach initial entry is made
with No. 33 1/2 bur. D, Initial bur entry. E,
Wedelstaedt chisel begins to establish facial outline form.

FIG. 21-40 Lingual view of preparation instrumentation. A, Wedelstaedt chisel plani ng lingual enamel wall. B, Inverted cone
bur is used to establish sharp linguogingival shoulder.

CHAPTER

21

Direct Gold Restorations

FIG 21-41 Use of small hoe facial approach in tooth preparation. A, Hoe planes lingual dentinal wall from incisal to gingival aspect. B, Hoe also planes this wall from gingival to incisal aspect (arrow). C, Hoe planes gingival cavosurface (arrow). See Fig. 21-44, D, for direction of
enamel portion of gingival wall for strong margin (full-length enamel rods).

FIG 21-42 Use of angle former to plane facial dentinal wall. A, Angle former before placement
i n preparation. B, Angle former in preparation. C, Angle former is directed apically (arrow) to
plane facial dentinal wall.

A, Axial plane before placement in preparation. B, Bibeveled hatchet before placement in preparation. C, Bibeveled hatchet is used to establish incisal retentive angle.

FIG 21-43

CHAPTER

21

Direct Gold Restorations

FIG 21-44 A, Angle former before use in preparation. B, Angle former is moved faciolingually (a)

to establish acute axiogingival line angle (b). C, Offset angle former thrust faciogingivally establishes acute facioaxiogingival point angle. D, Completed incisal and gingivoaxial retention form. (D,
From Stibbs GD. Direct golds in dental restorative therapy, Oper Dent 5(31:107, 1980.)

FIG 21-45 A, Wedelstaedt chisel may be used again to plane margins. B, Completed facial mar-

gin of Class III tooth preparation viewed from facial position.

CHAPTER 21

Direct Gold Restorations

FIG 21-46 A, First pellet of gold foil is placed from facial aspect into preparation. Note separation of teeth by 0.25 to 0.5 mm. B, Compaction of pellet into linguoaxiogingival point angle. Line
of force is directed linguoaxiogingivally while holding instrument is placed from lingual position. C, Holding instrument (a) prevents dislodgment of foil during compaction.

FIG 21-47 Holding instrument (a) remains in position as gold
foil is condensed across gingival wall toward facial portion of
preparation.

FIG 21-48 A, Offset condenser before
placement in cavity preparation. B, Compacted gold foil covering gingival wall and
cavosurface.

FIG 21-49 Lingual view. Monangle condenser confirms compaction of gold at linguogingival aspect
of restoration.

CHAPTER 21

Direct Gold Restorations

FIG

21-50 A, Monangle condenser is used to
build bulk of gold in gingival half of preparation. B,
Gingival half of restoration in longitudinal section.
Line of force (a) is directed axiogingivally during
compaction of gold to prevent dislodgment of
restoration.

FIG 21-51

A, Condenser is directed
over facial surface of adjacent tooth,
while gold is built toward incisal aspect. B, Gold is compacted from facioincisal aspect to cover lingual cavosurface; however, compaction direction
must continue to have a major vector
(arrow) toward axial wall to prevent
dislodgment. Therefore (at this stage)
the compacted foil on axial wall must
be well ahead (incisally) of the "growi ng" proximal surface.

FIG . 21-52

A, Right-angle

hand con-

denser begins to press gold into incisal
retention. B, This condenser forces gold
deeply into incisal retentive undercut.

accomplished in three phases. First, sufficient gold is
built up on the lingual wall so that the gold is very near
the incisal angle (Fig. 21-51). Second, the incisal area is
filled by compacting '/,,,-size pellets with the rightangle hand condenser (Fig. 21-52). Third, pellets of
foil are compacted into the incisolingual and incisal
areas with the offset condenser. This fills the incisal
portion, making a complete turn from lingual to facial
(Fig. 21-53, A). The entire incisal cavosurface is covered with gold (Fig. 21-53, B).
Additional gold compaction finishes the facial one
third of the restoration, then the Varney foot condenser
is used to "after-condense" over the contour of the
restoration. More separation is generated by slight activation of the separator, before finishing and polishing
the restoration. A sharp, gold foil knife is used to remove excess in the contact area, permitting a fine finish-

ing strip or steel matrix strip to pass through. A pull-cut
Shooshan file or gold knife may facilitate removal of excess gold facially (Fig. 21-54). Initial contouring of the
contact area is performed with long, extra-narrow,
extra-fine cuttle finishing strips, to gain access to the
proximal surface. Next, a wide, medium cuttle strip
may be used for rapid removal of excess gold. Final contouring continues with the medium and fine, narrow
strips. Finishing is performed with the extra-narrow,
extra-fine cuttle strip (Fig. 21-55). Care is taken to only
finish the facial or lingual areas with the strip and to
avoid flattening the contact area. The gold knife or cleoiddiscoid can be used to remove final excess gold from
cavosurface margins. The separator is then removed.
Final polishing is accomplished with a worn, extrafine cuttle strip. Polishing powder may be used. However, omitting this step results in a satin finish that is

C H A P T E R 21

Direct Gold Restorations

FIG 21-53 Completing the compaction of
gold into incisal region of preparation.
A, Offset bayonet condenser condenses
gold into incisal retention with mallet compaction. B, Incisal cavosurface is restored
with gold foil condensed with small mon-angle condenser.

FIG 21-54

A sharp, thin-bladed gold knife removes excess
gold from facial surface.

FIG

FIG 21-55 Fine cuttle finishing strips polish proximal surface
of gold foil restoration.

FIG
I I 21-57 Completed mandibular Class III gold foil restoration of lesion in Fig. 21-38.

less reflective of light and, therefore, perhaps more esthetic (Fig. 21-56).
SUMMARY
Direct-filling golds are useful in restorative dentistry. If
carefully manipulated by a dentist, these restorative
materials may provide lifetime service to patients and
promote their oral health (Fig. 21-57). Direct-filling
golds contribute to both the art and science of restorative dentistry.

21-56 Completed maxillary Class III gold foil restoration.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Pure gold materials used for photography in this chapter were
provided courtesy of Ivoclar-Williams Company, Inc., Amherst,
NY.
REFERENCES
1. Baum L: Gold foil (filling golds) in dental practice, Dent Clin
North Am, 199, 1965.
2. Black GV: The nature of blows and the relation of size of
plugger points force as used in filling teeth, Dent Rev 21:499,
1907.

CHAPTER

3. Dwinelle WH: Crystalline gold, its varieties, properties, and
use, Am J Dent 5:249, 1855.
4. Ferrier WI: Treatment of proximal cavities in anterior teeth
with gold foil, j Am Dent Assoc 21:571, 1934.
5. Ferrier WI: The use of gold foil in general practice, J Am Dent
Assoc 28:691, 1941.
6. Hodson JT: Compaction properties of various pure gold
restorative materials, J Am Acad Gold Foil Oper 12:52, Sept
1969.
7. Hodson JT: Structure and properties of gold foil and mat
gold, J Dent Res 42:575, 1963.
8. Hodson JT Stibbs GD: Structural density of compacted gold
foil and mat gold, J Dent Res 41:339, 1962.
9. Hollenback GM: There is no substitute for gold foil in restorative dentistry, j South Calif Dent Assoc 33:275, 1965.
10. Ingersol CE: Personal communication, 1982.
11. Lambert RL: A survey of the teaching of compacted gold,
Oper Dent 5(1):20, 1980.
12. Lund MR, Baum L: Powdered gold as a restorative material,
J Prosthet Dent 13:1151, 1963.

21

Direct Gold Restorations

13. Smith GE: Condenser selection for pure gold compaction,
j Am Acad Gold Foil Oper 15:53, Sept 1972.
14. Smith GE: The effect of condenser design and lines offorce on the
dental compaction of cohesive gold (Master's thesis), Seattle,
1970, University of Washington.
15. Smith GE, Hodson JT, Stibbs GD: A study of the degree of
adaptation possible in retention holes, convenience points
and point angles in Class III cavity preparations, J Am Acad
Gold Foil Oper 15(1):13, 1972.
16. Stibbs GD: Direct golds in dental restorative therapy, Oper
Dent 5(3):107, 1980.
17. Thomas JJ, Stanley HR, Gilman HW: Effects of gold foil condensation on human dental pulp, J Am Dent Assoc 78:788,
1969.
18. Trueman WH: An essay upon the relative advantage of crystallized gold and gold foil as a material for filling teeth, Dent
Cosmos 10:128, 1868.
19. Williams (Ivoclar-Williams Company): E-Z Gold instructional
brochure, Amherst, NY, Ivoclar-Williams.

A
A110, 202t
A + P + R. See Acid plus primer plus resin
(A+P+ R).
AADS curriculum guideline. See American
Association of Dental Schools
(AADS) curriculum guideline.
Abbreviations in tooth preparation, 279
Aberrant smooth surface pit fault, 532-533
Abfraction
biomechanics and, 146, 147f, 148f
diagnosis of, 411
terminology of, 278
Abrasion as tooth defect
and class V composite restoration tooth
preparation, 531-532
in examination and diagnosis, 278, 412
in treatment planning, 424
Abrasive discs
composite restoration and
class 11, 561
class III, 522
indirect restoration try-ins and, 583
Abrasive finishing strips
for class I and II indirect restorations,
586,587f
for composite restoration surfaces, 522f,
523
Abrasive points in amalgam restoration,
686f,687
Abrasive powered cutting instruments
air-, 327-329
burs in, 330-336. See also Bur.
classification of, 339
coated, 339
design characteristics of, 329-330
diamond, 336-338, 337t
materials for, 339-340
molded, 339
other than diamond, 338-340
Abscess, periapical, 413, 414f
Absorbents, 444, 465-466
Absorption, 139,144
composites and, 204, 479
Absorption efficiency for mercury, 160,
160t
Abutment teeth
and all-porcelain pontic on conservative
bridges, 647, 648
and cast metal restorations, 801, 817,
819f
and denture tooth pontic technique,
640
and porcelain fused-to-metal or
all-metal pontic, 640
removable partial denture
amalgam restorations and
class II, 713, 721
class V, 744
complex, 765
cast metal restorations and, 801
treatment planning and, 423
Accelerators, 136

Accredited Standards Committee, Medical
Devices (ASC MD156), 224b
Acellular layer of cementum, 31
Acetone in denture tooth pontic technique,
639
Acetone-based dentin adhesive system,
251
Acid
biocompatibility and, 255
in adhesion strategies, 241t
plaque bacteria and, 67, 90
Acid-etching, 179, 238-239, 240f
for bridges, 636, 638
with all-porcelain pontics, 649
for class I and II indirect restorations,
584,585f
for composite restorations, 481, 492-494
for dentin, 182-183
for enamel, 181
for processed composite veneers, 621
for resin-bonded splints, 632-636
in bleaching treatments, 610
in conservative procedure for maxillary
anterior teeth, 593f
in diastema correction, 601-604, 602
in microabrasion, 612-613
in repair
of inlay and onlay class I and II
indirect restorations, 589
of veneers, 630-631
phosphoric acid in, 238-239, 240f
sealants and, 187, 541, 542f
ti me for, 239
Acid plus primer plus resin (A + P + R),
241t
Acid red 52, 100
Acid rhodamine B, 100
Acidulated phosphate fluoride (APF), 111t,
111-112
chemical dissolution and, 144
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome
(AIDS), 350. See also AIDS
(Acquired immune deficiency
syndrome).
impact of, on health care personnel, 350
OSHA-required training on, 356
progression of HIV to, 356-357
Acquired occlusion, 38
Acrylic monomers, 475-476
history of use of, 191, 475-476
in hydrophilic bonding systems, 185f
polymerization and, 201-202
unfilled, 191
Acrylic resin restorations, 475-476
temporary, 582
Actinobolin, 113t
Actinomyces species
caries diagnosis at root surfaces and,
107
plaque community and, 73f, 74t, 91
secondary succession and, 77
Activator-ArtGlass, 260
Active metals, 135

B, Box; f, figure; t, table.

901

Acute caries, 276, 406f. See also Caries.
in infected dentin, 277-278, 279f
Acyclovir
in chickenpox, 393, 395t
in herpes simplex virus infection, 392,
395t
ADA. See American Dental Association
( ADA).
ADA-NIST. See American Dental Association with National Institute
on Standards and Technology
( ADA-NIST).
Adaptic
in comparison of composite properties,
202t
penetration coefficient for, 188t
Adherend, terminology for, 177
Adherent, terminology for, 177
Adherent bacteria, 69-72, 73f
Adhesion, 177-187,181t. See also Bonding;
Bonding systems.
adsorption, 237
basic concepts of, 237-238
bonding systems and, 181t, 181-187
amalgam, 185-186
extensive class I, 688-689
cast restoration, 186-187
dentin, 182-185
enamel, 181, 181t, 182f
luting systems in, 186-187
porcelain and ceramic repair systems
for, 186
strength of, 179-181, 181t
terminology in, 177-179
wetting and, 140, 179
classification of, 179, 180f
definition of, 237
dentin, 239-261, 241t, 244b, 247t-248t,
248b. See also Dentin bonding
systems.
diffusion, 237
electrostatic, 237
enamel, 238-239
in chemical protection of liners, 174
mechanical, 237
mechanisms of, 237
of conventional glass ionomers, 210
requirements for, 179, 180f
Adhesion bridges, defined, 642
Adhesion process, secondary succession
and, 77
Adhesive, terminology for, 177
Adhesive interfaces, 140, 177, 178f
Adhesive joint, 177, 178f
failure of, 237
strength of, 180
with amalgam bonding agent, 186f
Adhesive placement, 298-299
in amalgam restoration, class I
conservative, 679-681
excess, 690
extensive, 688-690
occlusolingual, 694

I ndex

Adhesive placement-cont'd
in composite restoration, direct
class I, 548-549
class II, 558
Adhesive placement-cont'd
large restoration or foundation in,
565
class III, 514-515
class IV, 526
class V, 533
Adjacent tooth
connection between pontic and, 638-639
quadrant dentistry and, 735, 736f
tooth preparation and
disadvantages of simultaneous, 521
outline form for, 286, 505
Adjunctive aids, 414-416
Admixed amalgam, 654
controversy over, 667
insertion of, 665
Adolescents, all-porcelain pontics for, 647.
See also Age.
Adrenergic-blocking drug side effects, 400
Adsorption, 144
ammonia gas, direct-filling gold and, 211
Adsorption adhesion or bonding, 237
Adverse reactions, emergency procedures
for, 443
Aerobes, 73f
Aerosols
contamination from, 347-348
control of, 378
precautions for, 343-344
protective masks for, 363
AFM. See Atomic force microscopes
(AFM).
Ag. See Silver (Ag).
Agar-agar impression material, 213, 213t
Age
cast metal restorations and, 802
color of teeth and, 597-598
complex amalgam restorations and, 766
rubber dam isolation variations related
to, 463, 464f
surface texture and characterization of
teeth and, 597
tooth preparation for restorations and,
273
Aging
biomechanics and, 146-148
caries diagnosis at root surfaces and, 107
caries patterns and, 68
class VI tooth preparations and, 736
color of teeth and, 598
complex amalgam restorations and, 766
darkening of dentin with, 206
future needs for, 8
glass-ionomer restorations for, 535
operative dentistry and, 4
future needs for, 8
physiologic changes with, 399-400
root surfaces caries in, 535
slot preparation for, 710-712
Ag-Sn amalgam alloy. See Silver-tin amalgam alloy.
AHA. See American Heart Association
( AHA).
AIDS (Acquired immune deficiency syndrome), 350. See also Human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
i mpact of, on health care personnel, 350

AIDS-cont'd
OSHA-required training on, 356
progression of HIV to, 356-357
Air coolant for cutting instruments, 342
Air entrapment in syringe, 520
Air-abrasive cutting instruments, 327-329
Airborne contamination, 347-348
Airborne particles, abrasive cutting
instruments and, 343
Air-turbine handpiece, 323, 323t, 324f, 325f
Air-water spray
as coolant, 342
high-volume evacuator with, 466-467
Al. See Aluminum.
Alcohol in disinfection, 367
Alexidine, 113t
Alginate impression material
cast metal restorations and, 802, 803f
direct temporary, 841-843
classification of, 213, 213t
handling and transporting of, 381-382
Alignment in esthetic procedures, 596-597
'liteflo, 202t
All-Bond 2, 245
desensitizing effect of, 258
hybrid layer and, 250
in amalgam restorations, 259
Allergy
medical review and, 399
to local anesthetics, 399, 435, 436
All-metal pontic with metal retainers,
640-646, 647f
Alloy pellets, 151
Alloys
amalgam. See Amalgam.
cast restorations and, 801
development of, 4
for hand cutting instruments, 309
gold. See Gold alloys.
metal
defined, 135
microstructure of, 135f
porcelain-fused-to-metal, thermal
expansion in, 138t
toxicity of, 9
All-porcelain pontic, 646-649
Alpha-interferon, 396
Alprazolam, 89t
Alumina. See also Aluminum.
in glass matrix for ceramic inlays and
onlays, 574
machined restorations and, 222, 223t
thermal expansion in, 138t
Alumina stone, 317
for polishing amalgam, 685, 686f
Aluminosilicate polyacrylic acid (ASPA),
208
Aluminous dental porcelain, thermal
expansion in, 138t
Aluminum. See also Alumina.
glass ionomer release of, 210
in composites, 192
Aluminum oxide
for sharpening stones, 317
in abrasive instruments, 339, 339t
in ceramic restorations and, 259, 260
in composite restorations, 521f, 522, 523
in glass-ionomer restorations, 521f, 522
Alveolar bone, 37
fracture of, 635
Alveolar mucosa, 36f, 37

Alveolar process, 35
periodontium and, 37
reflective mucosa of, 36
Amalgam, 148-170, 653-656
admixed, 654
controversy over, 667
insertion of, 665
bond strength between dentin and,
259
bonding systems for, 185-186
amalgam restorations on proximal
surfaces and, 689f, 715
carving of, restoration, 665-666
class II, 715, 730-734
both proximal surfaces in, 715
class III, 753
class V, 760-761, 762f
classification of, 149-152
clinical considerations for, 168-170,
169t
composition of, 149t, 152-158, 155t
contouring of, restoration
class I
conservative, 683-687
occlusolingual, 695
complex, 788f-789f, 792f-793f,
794f-795f, 795
corrosion of, 144
current status of, 653
darkening of tooth structure adjacent to,
297
finishing of, restoration, 666
class I
conservative, 683-687
occlusolingual, 695
class 11, 734-735
class III, 753
class V, 761-762
handling of, 656
hardness values for, 339t
hazards in removal of, 162
high-copper. See High-copper amalgam
alloys.
history of, 653
in restorations. See Amalgam
restorations.
insertion of, restoration, 665
class I
conservative, 681-683
occlusolingual, 695
class 11, 730-734
complex, 788f-789f, 788-789f, 791-795
land sliding of, 694, 695, 760
low-copper, 653-654
mercury hygiene and management with,
158-165, 160t, 161b
mixing of, 665
new, 4, 654
nonzinc or zinc-free, oxidation in, 152
particles of. see Particle, amalgam.
pin extension into, 772-773
polishing of, restoration
class 1, 685-687
class II, 734-735
class III, 753
class V, 761-762
mercury management and, 162
properties of, 149t, 152-158, 155t, 654
mechanical, 156-157,157t
repair procedures for, 259
sensitivity and, 169

I ndex

Amalgam-cont'd
setting reaction of, 152, 153f
spherical, 654
controversy over, 667
insertion of, 665
particles of alloy in, 150
strength of
decreased, 766
shear, 181t
structure of, 149t, 152-158, 155t
terminology of, 148-149, 149t
thermal expansion in, 138t
triturating, 665
types of, 653-654
uses of, 655, 656f
waste management and, 162, 165-168
mercury in, 158-165, 160t, 161b
Amalgam blues, 409
Amalgam creep, 157
Amalgam foundations
carving of occlusal surface of, 665-666
clinical indications for, 655, 657, 765
complex. See also Amalgam restorations,
complex.
chamber retention in, 787
clinical indications for, 765
final crown or onlay preparation after,
795
initial procedures for, 768-769
materials in, 769
pin retention in, 786
slot retention in, 768f, 786-787
tooth preparations for, 786-787
Amalgam knife
for gingival excess, 732-733
for interproximal excess, 522, 562
sharpening of, 320f, 321
Amalgam restorations, 148-170, 651-668.
See also specific restoration class.
advantages of, 658
alternatives for, 149, 196
bonding of. See Bonding systems, amalgam restoration.
box-only, 303, 710f
caries control and, 129, 130f
class 1. See Class I amalgam restorations.
class 11. See Class II amalgam
restorations.
class III. See Class III amalgam
restorations.
class IV, 671-672
class V. See Class V amalgam
restorations.
class VI, 736-737
introduction to, 671-672
material qualities and properties in,
671
classification of, 149-152
stress transfer in, 146
terminology for, 148-149, 149t
clinical considerations for, 168-170
clinical examination of, 409-410, 411f
clinical technique for, 658-666
initial procedures in, 658, 672, 687,
690
restorative, 664-666. See also specific
restoration class.
tooth preparation in, 658-664. See also
Tooth preparation, amalgam
restoration.
common problems with, 667

Amalgam restorations-cont'd
complex, 763-797
advantages of, 766
chamber retention in, 787
contraindications to, 766
disadvantages of, 766
foundation. See Amalgam
foundations.
indications for, 765-766
initial procedures in, 766-769
material qualities and properties in, 765
materials selected for, 769
pin-retained. See Pin-retained amalgam restorations.
restorative technique for, 787-795
bonding systems in, 787
contouring and finishing in,
788f-789f, 792f-793f, 795
desensitizer in, 787
insertion in, 788-789f, 791-795
matrix in, 787-791, 792f-793f, 794-795f
slot-retained
foundations and, 768f, 786-787
tooth preparation for, 768f, 785-786
tooth preparation in, 769-787, 772t,
777t
foundations and, 786-787
pin-retained, 769-785, 772t, 777t. See
also Pin-retained amalgam
restorations.
slot-retained, 768f, 785-786. See also
Slot-retained complex amalgam
restorations.
composite restoration differences from,
487
contraindications to, 657
controversial issues with, 667-668
conventional, 149-150
current status of, 653
dentin adhesion in, 258-259
dentin etching and priming in, in final
tooth preparation, 298-299
direct, clinical indications for, 656-657
disadvantages of, 658
external surfaces on, 170
for foundations. See Amalgam
foundations.
history of use of, 653
in examination and diagnosis, 409-410
in history of operative dentistry, 2
indications for, 656-657
initial procedures in, 658
class I conservative amalgam restorations and, 672, 687, 690
class 11, 696-697
lifetimes for, 169t
light-cured adhesive as sealer under, 655
nonbonded, 654-655
pin-retained. See Pin-retained amalgam
restorations.
repair of, 170
resistance and retention form needs and,
292-293
safety of, 653, 667
slot-retained. See Slot-retained complex
amalgam restorations.
tooth preparations for, 274, 303. See also
specific restoration class.
composite restoration preparations
versus, 304t
final, 298, 693f, 758f

Amalgam restorations-cont'd
treatment planning for, 425
tunnel tooth, 303
types of, 655f
types of materials for, 653-654
uses of, 655, 656f, 657f
Amalgam scraps, collection and disposal
of, 667
Amalgamators, 150f, 151
class I restorations and, 681-682
Amalgambond Plus, 259
Amalgapins, 298
Amantadine, 393, 395t
Ameloblasts, 16-17
Amelogenesis imperfecta, 279
clinical examination of, 412
American Association of Dental Schools
( AADS) curriculum guidelines,
350
American Dental Association (ADA), 224b
amalgam uses and, 167
cleaning instruments before sterilization
and, 369
composite uses and, 482, 539
Council on Scientific Affairs of, 224-225
evidence-based dentistry and, 389
gallium alloys and, 168
gold alloy classification system of, 215
infection control programs recommended by, 350
recommendations of
class I, II, and VI composite restoration, 539
sealant, 541
American Dental Association with
National Institute on Standards
and Technology (ADA-NIST), 149
American Heart Association (AHA), 399
American National Standards Institute
(ANSI), 225
American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM), 224b, 225
definition of adhesion by, 237
Ames test, 145
Amide anesthetics, 435
Amitryptyline, 89t
Ammonia gas adsorption of direct-filling
gold, 211
Ammonium bifluoride acid-etched inlay,
223f
Amylase, 77t
Anabolic reactions, 87-88
Anaerobes, 73f
Analgesia, 443-444
Anaphylactic shock, 399, 436
Anatomic contours of tooth in amalgam
restorations, 410
Anatomic form of composite restorations,
206, 207f. See also Wear resistance.
Anatomic occlusion, static, 418
Anatomic tooth crown, 281
Anatomy, 13-37. See also Teeth, anatomy of.
tooth preparation for restorations and,
273
Anchors for rubber dam other than retainers, 449, 450f, 455
Anesthesia
administration of, 436-443
allergy to, 399, 435, 436
amalgam restorations and, 658
benefits of, 436

I ndex

Anesthesia-cont'd
cartridge for, 438
maximum recommended dosage and,
435t
cast metal restorations and, 802
composite restorations and, 483
conduction, 437
duration of action of, 435, 435b
for operative treatment of caries, 127
in tissue retraction in final impression,
843
infiltration, 437
local, 434-443, 435b, 435t. See also Local
anesthesia.
maximum recommended dosage for,
435,435t
moisture control and, 445
overdose of, 434
patient cooperation and, 436
patient factors in, 435-436
syringe for, 437, 438-441
therapeutic dose of drug for, 434
topical, 441
Anesthetic test in pain evaluation, 421
Angle former, 312f, 314
class III gold restoration, 892, 894f, 895f
sharpening of, 320
Angle handpiece. See Handpiece.
Angles, 275f, 280, 282f
axial line
amalgam restoration, 747
composite restorations and, 506, 528
axiofaciogingival point, 748
axioincisal point, 283, 747
axiopulpal line, 692, 693f, 705, 750
bur
spiral, 334
taper, 334
cavosurface margin. See Cavosurface
margin angle.
cutting edge, 310f, 311
edge, 336
emergence, 599
esthetic dentistry and, 599, 600f
faciolingual line, 283, 714-715, 746
faciolinguoincisal point, 283
final tooth preparation and, 300
gingivoaxial. see Gingivoaxial line angle.
gold restorations and, 884, 885
incisal, 283, 594
incisoaxial, 639, 756-757
internal line, primary resistance form
and, 290, 291
mesioincisal, fracture on central incisor
and, 524f
occlusoaxial, 758, 884
of divergence and retention form, 293
point, 280, 282f, 283
primary resistance form and, 290, 291
proximofacial, 729
rake, 336
shank
cutting hand instruments and, 310
triple-angle, 310
skirt extensions and, 833
Angle's classification, 40
Annealing of direct gold, 874
Annual employee hazard communications
training, 226-227
ANSI. See American National Standards
Institute (ANSI).

Anterior guidance
articulators and, 55-58
condylar, lack of, 40, 57f
evaluation of, 418
Anterior teeth
cross-section of, 483-484
direct veneers for
full, 593f, 618-620
partial, 617-618
gold for cervical restorations of, 474,
475f
lingual surfaces of, class I amalgam
restorations on, 672
mandibular motion and, 58-61
porcelain veneer on, 474, 475f, 626-627
rubber dam isolation for, 450, 485
silicate cement for restorations in, 475
splinting techniques for, 632-634
tooth preparations and
class 111, 504
amalgam, 743
class IV, 523-528
class V, 528-533
class VI, 736-737
Anterior-posterior interarch relationships
in occlusion, 39f, 40
Antibacterial activity of saliva, 77t, 89, 89t
Antibiotics
in caries prevention, 113t
in human immunodeficiency virus
infection, 397
in splinting for avulsed teeth, 635
in valvular heart disease, 436
oral contraceptives and, 399
Antibody against HB core antigen
(Anti-HBc), 360
Anticaries vaccine, 9, 112
Anticholinergic side effects, 400
Anticonvulsants, 89t
Antidepressants
drug interactions with, 399, 400
salivary flow and, 89t
Antiepileptic agents, 399
Anti-HAV antibody. See Anti-Hepatitis A
virus antibody (Anti-HAV
antibody).
Anti-HBc. See Antibody against HB core
antigen (Anti-HBc).
Anti-HBs. See Anti-hepatitis B surface
antigen (Anti-1-113s).
Anti-hepatitis A virus antibody (Anti-HAV
antibody), 360
Anti-hepatitis B surface antigen (Anti-HBs)
boosters for, 360
testing for, 360-361
Anti-hepatitis D virus, test for, 360
Antiherpetic drugs
in herpes simplex virus infection, 392,
395t
in varicella zoster, 393, 395t
Antihistamines
salivary flow and, 89t
side effects of, 400
Antihypertensives
salivary flow and, 89t
side effects of, 400
Antimicrobial activity of fluoride, 110
Antimicrobial agents in caries prevention,
113, 113t
Antiparkinsonian drugs, 89t
Antipsychotics, 89t, 400

Antiretroviral therapy, 396, 398
Antispasmodics, 89t
Antiviral medications
in herpes simplex virus infections, 392,
395t
in respiratory viral infections, 393, 395t
in varicella-zoster virus infections, 393,
395t
Anxiolytics, 89t
Apatite hardness test, 143t
APE See Acidulated phosphate fluoride
( APF).
Aphthous ulcers, 398
Appetite depressants, 89t
Applicator tips for etchants in composite
restorations, 492, 493f
in class III lesions, 514-515, 517
Appointments
recall, 389
reevaluation, 389
routine initial, 389
ti me and number of
cast metal restorations and, 802
complex amalgam restorations and,
766
indirect restorations in, 572
Apposition of peritubular dentin, 97
Aqueous impression material technique,
381-382
Arches, dental, occlusion and, 38-40, 41f
Argon lasers, 327, 327t, 480
Aristalloy CR, 149t
Arkansas stone, 317
Arrested caries, 90, 276, 414f, 420f
clinical examination for, 408, 424f
histology of, 93-94, lllf
root-caries confused with, 424
Arrhythmia medications, 89t
ART technique. See Atraumatic restorative
treatment (ART) technique.
Articaine with epinephrine
duration of action of, 435b
maximum recommended dosage for,
435t
Articular disk, 45, 47f
Articular eminences, 45
Articulators
mandibular motion and, 55-58, 59f, 60f
temporomandibular joints and, 45
Artistic elements, 593-599
ASC MD156. See Accredited Standards
Committee, Medical Devices
(ASC MD156).
Aseptic techniques in infection control,
364-371
cleaning instruments before sterilization
and, 369t, 369-371
concepts of, 364-365
operatory asepsis and, 365-369
ASPA. See Aluminosilicate polyacrylic acid
( ASPA).
Aspirating syringe for local anesthesia,
437, 438-441
Aspiration
before injection, 442
small object, throat shield for reducing,
466,467f
Assessment, patient. See Patient
assessment.
ASTM. See American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM).

I ndex

Asymmetric teeth, 595-596
Atenolol, 89t
Atomic arrangement of material, 137
Atomic force microscopes (AFM), 193
Atraumatic restorative treatment (ART)
technique, 211
Attrition as tooth defect, 278, 411f
in examination and diagnosis, 412
in treatment planning, 424
Au. See Gold (Au).
Auditory threshold, 343
Autoclaving, 372-373
Automatrix, amalgam restoration with
class 11, 730, 731f
complex, 787-789, 791f, 792f-793f
matrix removal in, 793
Automixing systems for polyvinyl siloxane
impression materials, 845
Avulsed teeth, 635-636
Axial line angle
amalgam restoration, 747
composite restoration
class III, 506
class V, 528
Axial wall of tooth preparation
amalgam restoration, 660f
class II, 703, 704
class III, 745-746, 747f
composite restoration
class II, 555f, 556
class III, 507, 509f, 512-513
class IV, 525, 526
class V, 529
gold restoration, 883-884
nomenclature for, 279, 282f
Axiofaciogingival point angle, 748
Axioincisal point angle, 283
class III amalgam restoration and, 747
Axiopulpal line angle, 692, 693f, 705, 750
Azidothymidine, 356-357
AZT. See Azidothymidine.
B
B. See Boron.
B cells in Peyer's patches, 112
Ba. See Barium.
BAC. See Benzalkonium chloride (BAC).
Backward caries, 275
Bacteria
adherent, 69-72, 73f
cariogenic, 66f, 67. See also Plaque.
colonies of oral, 67
exposed pulp tissue and, 255-256
in biofilms, 377
in dental operatory, 347-349. See also Infection control.
in dental unit waterline, 377
in dentinal tubules, 302-303
in tooth preparation, 277-278, 279f
microleakage and, 254
plaque communities and, 72-73, 74f, 74t
salivary clearance of, 89
species limiting factor and, 78
spores of, 375, 376
sterilization and, 375, 376
Bacterial endocarditis, 399
Bacterial plaque, 69
Bacteriocins, 75
Bacteriologic contamination of dental operatory, 347-349. See also Infection
control.

Bacteroides melaninogenicus
oral hygiene and, 88
supragingival plaque community and,
86
Baked porcelain inlay, 474
Balance of hand cutting instruments, 310,
311f
Balancing mandibular pathways, 50
Baltimore College of Dental Surgery, 2
Bard-Parker handle with surgical blade
for interproximal excess in composite
restorations, 522-523, 562
in dentist prescribed-home applied
bleaching technique, 611
Barium in composites, 192
Barriers in asepsis concepts, 348, 365
Barton matrix, 695
Base metal alloys, 215, 216, 801
Bases, liners and. See Liners and bases.
Belladonna alkaloids, 89t
Bennett shift, 50
Benzalkonium chloride (BAC), 244t
Benztropine, 89t
Beveled conventional tooth preparation for
composites. See Tooth preparation, composite restoration.
Beveling, 206
in tooth preparation, 298, 300. See also
Tooth preparation.
for amalgam restorations, 705, 706-708
for composite restorations, 489-490
Bevels, 311-314
cast metal restorations and
inlay, 808, 812-816
onlay, 829, 830f
mesial or distal, 313
reverse, 313
Bibeveled hatchet, 311, 312f
in class III composite restorations, 509
in class III gold restorations, 892, 894f
Bicarbonate ion in saliva, 89
Bin-angle chisels, 312, 313f, 314
Bin-angle shank angle, 310
Bin-angle spoon, 312f
Bingham body behavior, 143, 144f
Biocompatibility, 145
of cast metal restorations, 802
of ceramic materials and cements in
indirect restorations, 572
of composite restorations, 207
of dentin adhesives, 255-256
of glass ionomers, 211
Biofilm, 377
Biohazard-labeled, heat-sealed plastic bag
for transporting impressions and
registrations, 379-380
Biologic monitoring strips for sterilization,
375
Biologic properties, 144-145
Biologic width in peridontal health
assessment, 417
Biomechanical unit, 145
Biomechanics for restorative dentistry,
145-148
Biphenyl dimethacrylate (BPDM), 244t
Bis biguanides, 113t
Bis-acryl composite materials, 582
Bis-glycidyl methacrylate analogues in
sealants, 188
Bis-GMA. See Bisphenol glycidyl
methacrylate (Bis-GMA).

Bisphenol glycidyl methacrylate (BisGMA), 244t
as primary monomer for matrix
monomer, 197
controversy about, 188-189
degree-of-conversion and, 201
history of use of, 191
in fourth-generation dentin adhesives, 245
in pit-and-fissure sealants, 541
matrix composition of, 194
monomer diluents and, 195
Bisphenol-A, biologic consequences of, 204
Bite registration. See also Impressions.
for all-porcelain pontics on conservative
bridges, 648
in porcelain fused-to-metal resin-bonded
bridges, 643
maximal interocclusal record with, 837,
838f
pouring paste in, 851-852
Bitewing radiographs
accuracy of, 106
in caries diagnosis for smooth surfaces,
105-107
in peridontal health assessment, 417
Biting loads, stress transfer of, 146
Black, Arthur, 2
Black, G.V, 2
Black spots of remineralized lesions, 94
Black's classification system for instruments, 309, 310-311
Black's principles of tooth preparation,
modified, 271-272
Black's spoon excavator
amalgam restorations and
class 11, 720
complex, 782, 783f, 793
composite restorations and, 560
Blades of hand cutting instrument
design of, 310
double-ended, 310
length of, 310f, 311
mechanisms of, 340
temperature and, 340
width of, 310f, 311
Blank in diamond instruments, 337
Bleaching treatments, 206, 608-612
Bleeding, gingival, control of, 444-445
Block-type mouth prop, 469
Blood
in contamination of handpiece, 376
infected, disposal of, 364
Blood pressure
elevated
antihypertensives for, 89t, 400
in medical review, 399
local anesthesia and, 435-436
Bloodborne infectious diseases, 350-356
OSHA-required training on pathogens
in, 356-358
Blue-gray discolored teeth, 409, 609, 612
Body of lesion of incipient carious enamel
lesion, 95
Boiling water sterilization, 374
Bond1, 247
Bonding, 137. See also Adhesion; Bonding
systems.
adsorption, 237
dentin, 239-261, 241t, 244b, 247t-248t,
248b. See also Dentin bonding
systems.

I ndex

Bonding-cont'd
diffusion, 237
enamel. See Bonding systems, enamel.
in diamond abrasive instruments, 338
metal-ceramic restoration, 260-261
micromechanical, retention form and, 293
new techniques for, 3
polymer, 136
primary, 137,143-144
pulp protection and, 295
resin, tooth structure and, 237, 632-636.
See also Resin cements.
resin-to-resin, difficulties in, 573
secondary, 137,144
strength of, 179-181, 181t
amalgams and, 259
cast restorations and, 186-187
dentin and, 182-183, 259
enamel and, 238
in vitro testing of, 256-257
terminology for, 177-179
survival of, 177
Bonding agent films, thickening agents for,
185
Bonding systems, 181t, 181-187. See also
Adhesion; Bonding.
all-porcelain pontics in conservative
bridges and, 649
amalgam restoration, 185-186, 654, 655,
665
class I
disadvantages of, 681
extensive, 688-690
class 1I, 717-718
both surfaces involved in, 689f, 715
class 111, 752-753
class V, 758-759
complex, 766, 767, 787
controversy in, 667-668
disadvantages of, 681
retention form and, 293
shear strengths and, 181t
tooth preparation and, 303
cast metal restoration, 186-187, 260-261
ceramics and, 135, 136
composite restoration, direct, 492-494
class I, 549-550
class 11, 560
class 111, 514-515, 520
class V, 533, 534
dentin. See Dentin bonding systems.
enamel, 237-239, 492-494
advantages of, 238
basic concepts of, 237-238
bonding systems for, 181, 181t, 182f
composite restorations and, 492-494
class III, 516-517
shear strengths and, 181t
glass ionomers and, 210, 211, 535, 536
luting systems in, 186-187
mechanical, 237
new developments in, 3, 9
pontic
conservative bridge technique and,
636
porcelain fused-to-metal resin-bonded
bridges and, 643
porcelain and ceramic repair systems
and, 186
retention form and, 293
timing of application of, 495

Bondlite, 244
Borden Airotor handpiece, 324f
Boron,192
Bow of retainer, 448
Boxlike tooth preparation for class I composite restorations, 544, 545
Box-only tooth preparations
amalgam restoration, 303, 664f
class I1, 710, 710f
composite restoration, 303, 491, 558f
BPDM. See Biphenyl dimethacrylate
(BPDM).
Breathing difficulty, 437
Bridges, conservative, 636-649
pontic for
all-metal, metal retainers and, 640-646,
647f
all-porcelain, 646-649
denture tooth, 638-640
temporary, 638
metal and porcelain, 645-646
natural tooth, 636-638
porcelain fused-to-metal, 640-646, 646,
647f
prerequisites for, 636
splint combined with, 644-645
Bridging in direct gold compaction, 876
Brinell hardness test, 142
Brittle fracture, 340
Brittle materials, 141
Broken drills or pins in pin-retained
restorations, 783
Brown line in acrylic restorations, 476
Brown spots, 94, 276, 406f. See also
Eburnated dentin.
caries examination for, 408, 413f, 414f
esthetic dentistry and, 609-610, 613, 614f
Brush
for cleaning instruments, 370
for cleansing before sealants, 541, 542f
Brushing of teeth, 114
technique for, 120, 121f
Bruxism, 38
clinical examination of, 412
dentin adhesion and, 257
extensive occlusal wear in, indirect
restorations for, 572f
incisal edge wear and, 600-601
Buccal crossbite, 40
Buffers in saliva, 89
Bulimia, 411
Bulk fracture of restorations, 169
in class I and II indirect restorations, 587
posterior, 207
Bupivacaine with epinephrine, maximum
recommended dosage for, 435t
Bur, 330-336
blades of, 336
flutes of, 335
runout and, 335-336
carbide, 330, 333, 341
tungsten, 323, 323t
classification systems of, 330-331
concentricity of symmetry of, 335
crosscutting, 334-335
design modifications of, 332-334, 334t
for sharpening of single-bevel instruments, 320
head of, 334-336
historical development of, 330
in macroabrasion, 613, 614f

Bur-cont'd
names and key dimensions of, 334t
neck diameter of, 334, 335f
round, 331, 332t
shapes of, 331
sizes of, 331-332, 332t
spiral angle of, 334
steel, 330
sterilization of, 372-373
taper angle of, 334, 335f
term of, 330
ultrasonic cleaning of, 370-371
Burnishing
amalgam restoration, 665, 719, 720f
class 1, 682-683, 684
class II, 719, 720f
contour change of compoundsupported matrix in, 728
precarve, 732
cast metal restoration, 217, 856-858
margins in, 863-865
composite restoration, 193f, 494, 526
Butt joints
in amalgam restorations, 659, 706
in composite restorations, 505, 530
Butterfly-type preparation, 288
C
CAD/CAM milling systems, 220t, 220-224,
222b,223t
cements and, 223-224
clinical considerations in, 224
composition, structure, and properties of
materials in, 221-223, 223t
defined, 221
fabrication stages for, 221, 222b
for ceramic inlays and onlays for class I
and II lesions, 571, 578-579, 582,
583f
for porcelain restorations, 474
for replacement of defective mesioocclusodistal restorations, 571f
tooth preparation and, 582, 583f
Calcite hardness, 143t
Calcium
direct-filling gold and, 212
glass ionomer release of, 210
in remineralization, 89-90
Calcium fluoride, 112
Calcium hydroxide. See also Calcium
hydroxide liners.
in cervical resorption prevention, 608, 609
in operative treatment of caries, 128, 129
in pulp capping, 100
in splinting for avulsed teeth, 635
mechanism of action for, 130
over excavated pulpal area, 101
Calcium hydroxide liners, 171f, 173-177,
295-296. See also Calcium
hydroxide.
amalgam restorations and
complex
mandibular lateral incisor with, 767f
maxillary second premolar with,
765f
pin-retained, 785
extensive class I, 688, 689f
cast metal inlay and, 7120711
composite restorations and, 488, 492
class 11, 556, 565, 566f
class V, 529, 530, 531

I ndex

Calcium hydroxide liners-cont'd
composition, structure, and properties
in, 175t
glass-ionomer restorations and, 535
in excavation close to pulp, 171f, 186
survival of, 177
Calculus removal in composite restorations, 483
Calibration of amalgamators, 151
Caliper, 595-596
Camphoroquinone, 198
Canaliculi in pulp-dentin complex, 23, 24f
Cancer
lymphoma and, 357
oral or oropharyngeal, 6
Candida albicans, 114
Candidiasis, 114
oral
history of, 397
HIV infection and, 357
Candy consumption, 102
Canine guidance, 50, 418
Canines, 15-16
color of, 597
distoincisal corner amalgam restoration
for, 747
rubber dam isolation for, 450
Capping
cusp. See Cusp, capping of.
pulp. See Pulp capping.
Capsules for amalgam alloy, 151
Carbamazepine, 89t
Carbamide peroxide, 611
Carbide bur, 330
cutting recommendations for, 341
extended head length of, 333
in operative treatment of caries, 127
tungsten, introduction of, 323, 323t
Carbide hand cutting instruments, 309
Carbide-tipped carvers, 561
Carbohydrates, 67
oral hygiene and, 87-88
Carbon steel hand cutting instruments,
309
Carborundum in abrasive instruments,
339, 762. See also Silicone carbide
(Sic).
Cardiac abnormalities in medical review,
399
Cardiovascular system, local anesthesia
and, 435-436
Caries, 63-132. See also specific site.
acute, 276, 406f
infected dentin and, 277-278, 279f
advanced lesions in, 96f, 97f, 99-101, 126
arrested, 90, 276, 414f, 420f
histology of, 93-94, 111f
backward, 275
cavitated, 276
chronic, 276
infected dentin and, 277, 279f
clinical characteristics of, 80f, 82f, 90-92
developmental stages of formation
and, 107f
sites for initiation in, 80f, 82f, 91-92
clinical examination for, 401t, 406-409
cost of, to society, 66
deep excavation of, in operative treatment, 129
definitions of, 66-67
developing concepts in dealing with, 9

Caries-cont'd
diagnosis of, 102b, 102-108, 401t, 406-409
assessment tools in, 102-103, 103t,
104t, 105t
caries activity tests and, 108
clinical risk assessment for, 102b
objectives of, 102
pits and fissures and, 104-105
root surfaces and, 107-108
schematic representation of stages in,
107f
smooth surfaces and, 105-107
ecologic succession and, 69, 73f, 74f
epidemiology of, 67-68
episodic, 94f, 95
etiology of, 69-90. See also Plaque.
extent of, 276, 277f
forward, 275
histopathology of, 92-101
dentin and, 95-99
enamel and, 92-95
incidence of, 68
incipient, 90, 276, 406f, 414f
defined, 93
early detection of, 103
microabrasion in, 613
time for progression of, to cavitation,
92
white spots of, 93, 743
introduction and definitions in, 65-69
management of, 101-102, 422b
need of restorations for, 271
new, projected need for operative dentistry and, 7
nomenclature for, 274-278
nonreversible, 276, 406f
notched lesion in, 532
operative dentistry and, 5t, 5-6, 6t, 125,
127-129, 130f
anesthesia for, 127
medical model in, 126t
projected need for, 7
pathogenic bacterial plaque and, 69-90.
See also Plaque.
pathophysiology of, 80f, 90
polarization of, 65
prevalence of, 65, 67-68
prevention of, 108t, 108-125, 109t, 422b
antimicrobial agents in, 113, 113t
diet in, 113
fluoride exposure in, 110-112, 111t
general health and, 110
immunization in, 112
occlusal area and, 189
oral hygiene in, 114-121
pit-and-fissure sealants in, 121-123, 125t
program for, 66
restorations in, 123-130
salivary functioning in, 112-113
treatment planning and, 424
xylitol gums in, 121
primary, 274
progression of lesions in, 80f, 82f, 86f, 92
rampant, 276, 406f
rapid, infected dentin and, 277-278, 279f
rate or speed of, 276
recurrent, 276, 277f
clinical examination of, 406f, 410
treatment planning for, 425
residual, 275, 276, 704f
final tooth preparation and, 294-295

Caries-cont'd
reversible, 276, 406f, 414f
risk factors for, 102, 102b, 401t
cast metal restorations and, 801-802
clinical examination and, 104t
identification of, 103
medical factors with increased, 102,
103t
secondary, 206, 276, 277f
slow, 276, 414f, 420f
infected dentin and, 277, 279f
socioeconomic groups and, 65-66
tactile evidence of, 103
terminology for, 274-278
treatment of, 124-130. See also specific
restoration type.
caries control restoration in, 126-130
medical model for, 68-69, 69t, 108t
objectives for, 126
scheme for, 124f
strategies for, 109t
visual evidence of, 103
Caries activity tests, 108
Caries control, term of, 125
Caries control restorations, 126-130
amalgam in, 128f, 129f, 655
clinical indications for, 655, 656-657
complex, 765-766, 769
controversy in, 129-130
objectives and indications for, 126-127
operative technique for, 127-129, 130f
Caries-disclosing dyes in final tooth prepa
ration, 294
Cariogenic bacteria, 66f, 67. See also Plaque.
Cariogenic potential of tooth, 67
Cartridge
disposal of, 443
local anesthestic, 438
maximum recommended dosage and,
435t
Carver, Hollenback, 723-725, 732, 733
Carving of amalgam, restorations and,
665-666
class 11, 715, 723-725, 730-734
class 111, 753
class V, 760-761, 762f
Caseation necrosis, 398
Cassette holder for instruments, 370, 371f
Cast
marginal adaptation of, 863-866
mounted on semiadjustable articulator,
837,839f
trying-in of. See Cast metal restorations,
casting for.
working. See Working casts and dies.
Cast gold, 873
thermal expansion in, 138t
Cast metal frameworks for resin-bonded
bridges, 640-642
Cast metal restorations, 799-869. See also
Cast restorations.
advantages of, 802
biocompatibility of, 802
bonding for, 186-187, 260-261
casting for, 856, 858-866
adjusting of, 856-858, 859f, 860f, 861f,
862f
i mproving marginal adaptation
in, 863-866
proximal contacts in, 860-862,
866f

I ndex

Cast metal restorations-cont'd
casting for-cont'd
occluding of, 862-863
polishing of, 856-858, 859f, 860f, 861f,
862f
preparing mouth for, 858-860
removal of, 866
seating of, 856-858, 860-862, 866f
chair time and, 802
contraindications to, 801-802
disadvantages of, 802
in dental rehabilitation, 801
indications for, 801
initial procedures for, 802-803
inlay, 803-826, 827f
final preparation for, 808-816
bevels and flares in, 812-816
pulp protection in, 808-812
removal of infected carious dentin
in, 808-812
initial preparation for, 803-808, 809f
proximal box and, 806-808, 809f,
813f, 814f
modifications in, 816-826, 827f
abutment teeth preparations in, 817,
819f
access and visibility for, 822-824,
825f, 827f, 828f, 831f
capping of cusps in, 822, 823f
esthetics and, 817
facial or lingual smooth surface
affected by caries or other injury
in, 824-826, 827f
facial or lingual surface groove
extension and, 817, 818f, 820f
fissures in facial and lingual cusp
ridges and, 819-822
gingival extensions to include rootsurface lesions and, 817, 819f
marginal ridges and, 819-822
maxillary first molar with unaffected, strong oblique ridge and,
817-819, 820f
mesioocclusodistal preparation and,
816-817
reducing cusps for capping in,
822-824, 825f, 827f, 828f, 831f
materials for, 214-217, 215t, 216t,
801-803
onlay, 826-837
definition of, 281, 826
final preparation for, 829, 830f
initial preparation for, 826-829
modifications in, 829-837, 866f, 868f
caries, fractured cusps, or other injury and, 829-831
endodontically treated teeth in,
836
esthetics on maxillary premolars
and first molars and, 835-836,
866f, 868f
facial or lingual smooth surface
areas included in, 829-831
facial or lingual surface groove
extension and, 829-837
resistance and retention form
enhancement in, 831-835
treatment planning for, 426
resistance form needs and, 291,
831-835

Cast metal restorations-cont'd
restorative techniques for, 837-867,
868f
casting in, 858-866. See also Cast
metal restorations, casting for.
cementation in, 866, 867f, 868f
final impression in, 843-846, 847f
interocclusal record in, 837, 838f, 839f
repair in, 866-867
retention form and, 293
spruing, investing, and casting in,
856
strength of, 802
temporary restorations and, 837-843
direct, 838f, 841-843
indirect, 838-841
tooth preparations for, 274, 803-837
inlay, 803-826, 827f. See also Cast
metal restorations, inlay.
onlay, 826-837. See also Cast metal
restorations, onlay.
treatment planning for, 426
wax patterns and, 853-856
finishing, 855-856, 857f
forming occlusal surface in, 854-855
forming pattern base for, 853
forming proximal contour and contact in, 853-854
initially withdrawing and reseating,
856,858f
working casts and dies in, 846-852
completing, 847-851, 852f
interocclusal records and, 851-852
pouring final impression and, 847
veneers incorporated into, 628-630
Cast posts and cores in complex amalgam
restorations, 769
Cast restorations. See also Cast metal
restorations.
bonding of, 186-187
clinical examination of, 410
final tooth preparation and
pulpal protection in, 297
smoothness or roughness in, 301
in examination and diagnosis, 410
treatment planning for, 426
Casting in cast metal restorations. See Cast
metal restorations, casting for.
Catabolic reactions, 87-88
Category designation four (CD4) glycoprotein antigens, 356
Category designation four/category designation eight (CD4/CD8) lymphocyte ratios, 357
Cavitation in caries, 276
demineralization of enamel and, 90
time for progression of incipient caries
to, 92
Cavity, definition of, 271. See also Caries.
Cavity preparation, 271. See also Tooth
Preparation.
Cavosurface margin angle, 275f, 280, 286,
300
amalgam restoration, 658-661, 661-662
class I, 679
extensive, 687, 688f
occlusolingual, 691
class II, 702, 706
class III, 746
complex, 767f

Cavosurface margin angle-cont'd
composite restoration, 489, 490
class I, 547, 548, 549f
class II, 551, 552, 553-554, 557
class III, 505, 506, 509, 510f, 511f, 513
class IV, 525, 526
class V, 528, 529, 530, 532, 533
facial/lingual slot, 491
CBM restorations. See Ceramic-bonded-tometal (CBM) restorations.
CCR. See Conservative composite restorations (CCR).
CD4 glycoprotein antigens. See Category
designation four (CD4) glycoprotein antigens.
CDC. See Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC).
CD4/CD8 lymphocyte ratios. See Category
designation four/category designation eight (CD4/CD8) lymphocyte ratios.
CDMIE. See Council on Dental Materials,
Instruments, and Equipment
(CDMIE).
CDT. See Council on Dental Therapeutics
( CDT).
Cellular cementum, 31
Cellulose wafers in operating field, 465-466
Cement
composite, 217-220, 21St, 219t
class I and II indirect restoration, 584,
585f-586f
removal of excess in, 586, 587f
composition, structure, and properties
of, 223-224
displacement of, 220
for cast metal restorations, 866, 867f, 868f
for indirect tooth-colored restorations for
class I and II lesions, 583-584, 585f
for machined restorations, 223-224
for temporary restorations, 582
luting, 219, 219t
silicate, history of use of, 191
thermal expansion in, 138t
Cement bases, definition of, 171
Cement gap in machined restorations, 223
Cement liners, definition of, 171
Cemented pins, 771, 772. See also Pinretained amalgam restorations.
Cementoblasts, 31
Cementodentinal junction, 31
Cementoenamel junction, 279f, 280
clinical examination for caries at, 408-409
Cementoblasty in notched carious lesion, 532
Cementum
anatomy, histology and physiology of,
31, 32f
in finishing and polishing procedure
hazards, 761, 762f
periodontium and, 37
root resorption and, 31, 32f
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
infection control programs recommended by, 350
on cleaning instruments before sterilization, 369
on regulation of infected health care personnel, 356
type C hepatitis report of, 359

I ndex

Central fossa occlusal line, 38, 39f
Central groove, 38
Central nervous system (CNS), 436
Central pattern generator, 61-62
Centric cusps, 38
Centric holding cusps, 42, 43f, 44f
Centric occlusion (CO), 47f, 48
Centric relation (CR), 45-48
Ceramic inlays and onlays in class I and II
lesions, 571, 574-579, 575t
fabrication method for, 575, 576f
in replacement of defective mesioocclusodistal restorations, 571f
Ceramic Reconstruction Systems (CEREC),
221, 578-579, 587, 588f
tooth preparation for, 582, 583f
Ceramic repair systems, 186
Ceramic restorations
bonding for, 237f, 259-260
cavosurface margins in, 300, 301f
repair of inlay and onlay, 574-579, 575t
resistance form needs and, 291
treatment planning for, 426
Ceramic veneers, pressed, 621, 627, 629f
Ceramic-bonded-to-metal (CBM) restorations, 214-215
Ceramic-metal mixtures
bonding of, 260-261
glass ionomers and, 208f, 209
in complex restorations, 769, 795
Ceramic-optimized resins for indirect
restorations, 573
Ceramics
brittleness of, indirect restorations and,
572-573
chemical dissolution and, 144
classification of, 136
definitions of, 135-136
device for pressing, 577f
fracture repair and, 186
glass-, 222
hot pressed glass, 575-578
machined restorations and, 222, 223t
physical and mechanical properties of,
75t, 574
CEREC. See Ceramic Reconstruction Systems (CEREC).
Cermets
bonding of, 260-261
glass ionomers and, 208f, 209
in complex restorations, 769, 795
Ceromers, indirect restorations with, 573
Cervical flexure defects, microfill composites for, 477
Cervical hypersensitivity, 258
Cervical line, 31, 280
Cervical lymphadenopathy
in HIV infection, 357
in medical review, 398
Cervical resorption as bleaching side effect,
608
Cervical restorations
class V amalgam, 743, 744
gold, 474f
microfill composites for, 477
Cervical retainer placement in rubber dam
isolation, 459-461
in class V amalgam restoration procedure, 754
modification of, 882f

Cervident, 244
CPA wear. See Contact-free area (CIA)
wear.
C-factor. See Configuration factor (C-factor).
Chain reaction polymerization, 136,137f
Chair, patient position and, 431
Chamber retention for amalgam
foundations, 787
Chancre, 399
Charting, 402, 403f-404f
chairside assistant and, 405
Cheeks
cutting instruments and, 342-343
reflective mucosa of, 36
retraction of, 433
Cheeselike necrosis, 398
Cheilitis, 357
Chelating agents in smear layer treatment,
245
Chemical, hazardous, 226
Chemical bonding, 179,180
Chemical corrosion, 144
in amalgam alloy reactions, 154, 155t
Chemical degradation theory of wear, 205
Chemical dissolution, 144
class V composite restoration for, 531
Chemical erosion, 411, 412f
Chemical properties, 143-144, 145f
Chemical protection for dental pulp in
restorations, 170
Chemical toxicity in pulpal irritation, 254
Chemical vapor pressure sterilization, 373
of handpiece, 379
Chemiclaving, 373
Chewing
incisor point and, 54
physiology of, 61
Chickenpox, 394t-395t
history of, 393, Plate 9-1
Chief complaint in patient assessment, 389
Child, rubber band isolation for, 463, 464f
Chisels, 311f, 313f
applications for, 314
bin-angle, 312, 313f, 314
blades of, 311f
categories of, 310
sharpening of, 320
straight, 313f, 314
Wedelstaedt, 312, 313f, 314
Chlorhexidine
human immunodeficiency virus infection and, 397
in caries prevention, 113, 113t
in cleaning equipment, 366
in hand cleansers, 363
Chlorine in disinfection. See Hypochlorite.
p-Chloro, meta-xylenole hand cleansers,
363
Chlorophosphate-ester-based materials,
244
Chloroplatinic acid, 213-214
Chlorpheniramine, 89t
Chlorphentermine, 89t
Chlorpromazine, 89t
Chroma, 139
Chromium hand cutting instruments, 309
Chromium-oxide (Cr2o3) systems in cast
metal alloys, 215
Chronic caries, 276
infected dentin and, 277, 279f

CIE system. See Commission Internationale
de l'Eclairage system (CIE).
Cinnebar, 161
Clamp. See Retainer.
Class I amalgam restorations, 672-695, 696f
advantages of, 671-672
clinical indications for, 655, 656
conservative, 672-687
facial pit of mandibular molar and, 679
initial procedures in, 672
lingual pit of mandibular molar and,
679
occlusal pits and fissures in, 679
restorative technique for, 679-687
adhesive system in, 679-681
contouring and finishing in, 683-687
insertion in, 681-683
matrix placement in, 681
sealer placement in, 679-681
tooth preparation in, 672-679, 680f, 681f
final, 677-679, 680f, 681f
initial, 672-677
contraindications to, 671
convenience form and, 293
disadvantages of, 672
extensive, 687-690
extruded by mercuroscopic expansion,
157f
indications for, 655, 656, 671
initial procedures for, 696-697
introduction to, 671-672
material qualities and properties in, 671
occlusal loading of, 142f
occlusal surface carving in, 665-666
occlusofacial, 695, 696f
occlusolingual, 690-695
initial procedures for, 690
restorative technique for, 694-695
tooth preparation for, 690-694
outline form in tooth preparation for,
673f
quadrant dentistry in, 735, 736f
tooth preparation for, 660-661
conservative, 672-679, 681f, 860f
outline form in, 673f
extensive, 687-688, 689f
occlusolingual, 690-694
Class I composite restorations, direct,
544-550. See also Class I
restorations.
advantages of, 540
American Dental Association recommendations for, 539
C-factor and, 480
contraindications to, 539-540
disadvantages of, 540
faciolingual extension in, 547f
flowable composites for, 478
indications for, 539
initial clinical procedures for, 544
mesiodistal extension in, 547f
outline form in tooth preparation for,
288,543f
pertinent material qualities and properties of, 539
restorative technique for, 548-550
tooth preparation for, 544-548, 549f
Class I gold restorations, 878-880, 881f. See
also Gold alloys.
principles of, 877-878

I ndex

Class I indirect tooth-colored restorations,
569-590. See also Inlay; Onlay.
advantages of, 571-572
ceramic inlays and onlays in, 574-579,
575t
clinical procedures for, 579-589, 587t
CAD/CAM, 582,583f, 587,588f
common problems and solutions in,
587
finishing and polishing procedures in,
584-587, 587t, 588f
i mpression in, 581
repair of inlays and onlays in, 588-589
temporary restoration in, 582
tooth preparation in, 579-581
try-in and cementation in, 583-584, 585f
contraindications to, 571, 572f
disadvantages of, 572-573
indications for, 571
introduction to, 571-573, 574f, 575f, 575t
laboratory-processed composite inlays
and onlays in, 573, 574f, 575t
Class I relationships, 40
Class I restorations, 281, 282f
amalgam. See Class I amalgam
restorations.
C-factor and, 480
composite
direct. See Class I composite restorations, direct.
tooth preparation types for, 488-489
convenience form and, 293
indirect tooth-colored. See Class I indirect tooth-colored restorations.
primary resistance form in, 290
primary retention form and, 292-293
Class II amalgam restorations, 696-735,
736f. See also Class 11 restorations.
advantages of, 671-672
clinical indications for, 655, 656
restorative technique for, 717-735
adhesives in, 717-718
finishing and polishing in, 734-735
inserting and carving in, 730-734
matrix placement in, 718-730, 731f
automatrix, 730
both surfaces and, 715, 721f, 722f,
724f, 725f, 788f-795f
compound-supported, 726-729
precontoured strip, 729-730
universal, 718-726
sealer placement in, 717-718
tarnished occlusal surface of, 155f
tooth preparation for, 697-717
mandibular first premolar and, 708-709
mandibular second premolar and
one only proximal surface in, 697-708
two proximal surfaces in, 716
maxillary first molar and, 709-710
maxillary first premolar and, 710
one only proximal surface, 697-713
abutment teeth for removable partial denture in, 713
adjoining restorations in, 712, 713f
box-only, 710
cleaning, inspecting, desensitizing,
and bonding in, 708
extensive caries excavation in, 703f,
704f, 715
external walls in, 706-708
final, 703-708

Class II amalgam restorations-cont'd
tooth preparation for-cont'd
one only proximal surface-cont'd
initial, 697-703
modifications of, 710-713
occlusal outline form or step in,
697-699
proximal outline form or proximal
box in, 699-703
pulp protection in, 703-705, 705, 715
removal of defective enamel and
infected dentin in, 703-705
rotated teeth in, 712
secondary resistance and retention
forms in, 705-706
slot preparation for root caries in,
710-712
unusual outline forms in, 712
variations in, 708-710
retention locks in, 298, 705, 706f
two proximal surfaces, 714-717
matrix placement in, 723
occlusal extensions in, 714
proximal extensions in, 700f,
714-715, 774f
Class 11 cast metal restorations, 799-869. See
also Cast metal restorations.
Class lI composite restorations, direct,
550-563. See also Class 11
restorations.
advantages of, 540
American Dental Association recommendations for, 539
before and after picture of, 473f
contraindications to, 539-540
disadvantages of, 540
extensive, 563-567
foundations of, 563-567
indications for, 539
initial procedures in, 550-551
insertion of, 494f, 496
material qualities and properties of, 539
matrix placement in, 494
restorative technique in, 558-563
tooth preparation in, 488-489, 551-558
Class II gold restorations, 878
Class II indirect tooth-colored restorations,
569-590. See also Class II restorations; Inlay; Onlay.
advantages of, 571-572
ceramic inlays and onlays in, 574-579,
575t
clinical procedures for, 579-589, 587t
CAD/CAM, 582, 583f, 587, 588f
common problems and solutions in,
587
finishing and polishing, 584-587, 587t,
588f
i mpression in, 581
repair of inlays and onlays in, 588-589
temporary restoration in, 582
tooth preparation in, 579-581
try-in and cementation in, 583-584,
585f
contraindications to, 571, 572f
disadvantages of, 572-573
indications for, 571
introduction to, 571-573, 574f, 575f, 575t
laboratory-processed composite inlays
and onlays in, 573, 574f, 575t
Class 11 relationships, 40

Class II restorations, 281-283
amalgam. See Class II amalgam
restorations.
cavosurface margins in, 300, 301f
composite. See Class 11 composite
restorations, direct.
convenience form and, 293-294
indirect tooth-colored. See Class II
indirect tooth-colored
restorations.
outline form for initial tooth preparation
for, 288-289
bur head in, 272, 288
primary resistance form in, 290-291
primary retention form and, 292, 293
weak or missing proximal contacts in,
498
Class II tendency, 40
Class III amalgam restorations, 743-753. See
also Class III restorations.
advantages of, 745
contraindications to, 744-745
disadvantages of, 745
finishing of, 753
indications for, 743-744
initial procedures for, 745
isolation problems and, 657
mandibular incisor and, 751-752
material qualities and properties of, 743
maxillary canine distal surface and,
745-751, 752f
restorative technique for, 752-753
tooth preparation for, 745-752
final, 748-752, 753f
initial, 745-748
Class III composite restorations, direct,
504-523. See also Class III
restorations.
advantages of, 504
contouring and polishing composite in,
521-523
contraindications to, 503, 504f
disadvantages of, 504
etching, priming, and placing adhesive
for, 514-515
indications for, 503
initial procedures in, 504
inserting and curing in, 516-521
material qualities and properties of, 503
matrix placement in, 494, 515-516
microfill, 534-535
restorative, 514-523
tooth preparation for, 504-514
beveled, 506-514
conventional, 505-506
Class III glass-ionomer restorations, 535536
Class III gold restorations. See also Gold
alloys.
contraindications to, 878
incisal retention in, 890f
indications for, 878
instrumentation for, 891, 892, 893f, 894f,
895f
lingual view of, 890f
proximofacial view of, 890f
restorative procedure in, 892-898
separation of teeth in, 891, 892f
tooth preparation for, 889-891
modifications of, 891, 892f
principles of, 877-878

I ndex

Class III relationships, 40
Class III restorations, 283
amalgam. See Class III amalgam
restorations.
composite. See Class III composite
restorations.
primary retention form and, 292-293, 806f
tooth preparation for
combination, design for, 489f
composite replacement restoration
and, 489-490, 491f
modified, design for, 490-491
outline form for initial, 288, 289
weak or missing proximal contacts in,
498
Class IV amalgam restorations, 671-672
Class IV composite restorations, direct,
283, 284f, 523-528
advantages of, 504
before and after picture of, 473f
C-factor and, 480
contraindications to, 503, 504f
disadvantages of, 504
glass ionomers and, 535-536
indications for, 503
initial procedures in, 523
matrix placement in, 494
polyester strip, 515
microfill, 534-535
restorative technique in, 526-528
tooth preparation for, 523-526
composite replacement and, 489-490,
491f
modified, design for, 490-491
outline form for initial, 288
weak or missing proximal contacts in,
498
Class V amalgam restorations, 754-762. See
also Class V restorations.
advantages of, 745
duration of restoration in, 744
class II lesions contiguous with, 712, 713f
clinical indications for, 655, 656
contraindications to, 744-745
disadvantages of, 745
esthetic considerations in, 657
extruded by mercuroscopic expansion,
157f
in root caries encircling tooth, 711-712
indications for, 744
initial procedures for, 754-755
large, line angles and, 758, 759f
material qualities and properties of, 743
restorative technique for, 758-762
tooth preparation for, 755-758, 759f
Class V composite restorations, direct,
528-534. See also Class V
restorations.
advantages of, 504
contraindications to, 503, 504f
disadvantages of, 504
indications for, 503
initial procedures in, 528
microfill, 534-535
restorative procedure in, 533-534
tooth preparation for, 528-533
Class V glass-ionomer restorations, 535-536
Class V gold restorations. See also Class V
restorations; Gold alloys.
contraindications to, 878
indications for, 878

Class V gold restorations-cont'd
instrumentation for, 884-885, 885f-886f,
887f
operating field for, 880-882
restorative procedure in, 886-888, 889f
tooth preparation for, 882-884, 887:
principles of, 877-878
Class V restorations, 283, 285f
cervical, microfill composites for, 477
cervical retainer placement of rubber
dam for, 459-461
convenience form and, 293
dentin adhesion in, 257
microleakage with, 254-255
outline form for, 289
primary retention form and, 292-293
retraction cord in gingival extension for,
485-486,487f
root-surface, retention in, 499
rubber dam isolation for, 485
canine, 450
incorrect location of hole in, 465
thicker, 446, 452
tooth flexure and, 146, 147f
tooth preparation for
composite replacement and, 489-490,
491f
modified, design for, 490-491
Class VI amalgam restorations, 283,
736-737
introduction to, 671-672
material qualities and properties in, 671
Class VI composite restorations, 283,
543-544
advantages of, 540
American Dental Association recommendations for, 539
contraindications to, 539-540
disadvantages of, 540
indications for, 539
material qualities and properties of, 539
Class VI gold restorations, 878
Class VI restorations, 283
Clean water reservoir system contamination, 378
Cleaning
and inspecting and sealing in final tooth
preparation, 301-303
in class I amalgam restoration, 677,
679
of instruments before sterilization, 369t,
369-371
of operating site for composite restorations, 483
of surface for dental adhesion, 179
Clearance and desired occlusal plane
before reducing cusps for
capping, 822, 826
Clearance angle, 336
Clearance face, 336
Clearfil Bond System, 244, 245
Clearfil Liner Bond 2, 249-250
Clefts in dentinal tubules, 99. See also Fissure; Pit or fissure.
Clenching, 38
extensive occlusal wear in,572f
Cleoid edge, 314, 314f, 315
Cleoid end of discoid-cleoid instrument in
amalgam carving, 665
in class I restorations, 683-687
Climax community, 76, 78

Clindamycin, 397
Clinical epidemiology, 405
Clinical examination. See Examination and
diagnosis.
Clinical longevity, restoration. See
Longevity, clinical.
Clinical risk assessment. See Risk.
Clinical tooth crown, terminology of, 281
CMV See Cytomegalovirus (CMV).
CNS. See Central nervous system (CNS).
CO. See Centric occlusion (CO).
Coated abrasive instruments, 339
Cobalt in hand cutting instruments, 309
Cobalt-chromium
in cast metal restorations, 215
thermal expansion in, 138t
Cocoa butter, 449
Co-Cr. See Cobalt-chromium.
Code numbers for treatment plan, 404f
Coefficient of thermal expansion or contraction, 137, 138t
for casting alloys, 216
Coherence of bacteria, 69-72, 73f
Cohesion of direct-filling gold, 211, 874, 876
Col
as habitat for bacterial plaque, 83
contact area and, 34
Cold sores, 392
Cold test for teeth, 415
Collagen
air-drying reaction of, 251-254
fourth-generation dentin adhesives and,
245
Collagen banding, 240, 242f
Collagen collapse, 251-254
Collagenase, 88
Collar, cast metal restoration
inlay, 824
onlay, 833-835
Collection and disposal of amalgam scrap
and mercury, 667
Collodion, 190
Colloidal silica, 197
Colonization resistance, 75
Color matching, 139-140, 597-598
composite restoration, 206, 483
mixing two or more shades together
in, 484
test assessment of shade on tooth in,
484-485
machined restorations and, 222-223
Color modifiers, 598-599
Commission Internationale de l'Eclairage
system (CIE), 139-140
Commitment, restorations and
amalgam, 656
composite, 482
Communicable disease history, 392-400,
394t-395t, Plate 9-1
aphthous ulcers in, 398
chickenpox in, 393, Plate 9-1
condyloma acuminatum in, 393, Plate 9-1
gonorrhea in, 398
hairy leukoplakia in, 397
hepatitis B virus in, 396
hepatitis C virus in, 396
herpes simplex virus in, 392-393, Plate 9-1
HIV-associated periodontal diseases in,
397-398, Plate 9-1
human immunodeficiency virus in, 396397

I ndex

Communicable disease history-cont'd
infectious mononucleosis in, 396
Kaposi' s sarcoma in, 397, Plate 9-1
lymphadenopathy in, 398
mumps in, 396
oral candidiasis in, 397
respiratory viruses in, 393
rubella in, 393-396
rubeola in, 396
salivary-gland disease in, 398
shingles in, 393, Plate 9-1
syphilis in, 398-399
tuberculosis in, 398
Communications, hazard, 226
annual employee training and, 226-227
Communities
and habitats of plaque, 72-73, 74f, 78
climax, 76, 78
Compaction, gold alloy
class I restoration and, 879-880
E-Z gold technique and, 877
principles for, 874-876, 877f
Complete fracture of tooth, 278, 412f
Complex amalgam restorations, 763-797.
See also Amalgam restorations,
complex.
Complex motion of mandible, 47f, 48
Complex tooth preparation, 279, 282f, 765f
Compomers, 209-210, 217, 218t, 478, 478t,
535
composition, structure, and properties
of, 209t
Composite
anterior, thermal expansion in, 138t
cements for. See Composite cements.
choice of, 473
composition, structure, and properties
of, 202t, 202-206
contouring of, restoration, 496-497
class I, 550
class II, 561-563
class III, 521-523
class IV, 528
class V, 521f, 522f, 534
problems in, 498
conventional, 476-477
glass ionomer, 478, 478t
curing of, restorations and
class I, 549-550
class II, 560-561
class III, 516-521
class IV, 527
class V, 533-534
definitions of, 136-137
development of new, 3
filler level ranges for, 194, 194t
finishing problems with, 498
flowable, 477-478
sandwich technique for, 304
thermal expansion in, 138t
glass ionomer, 478, 478t
handling characteristics of, 196
hardness values for, 339t
history of use of, 191-194, 476-478
hybrid, 477
in closing of embrasures in esthetic dentistry, 601
in diastema correction, 601-604
in examination and diagnosis, 410f, 411
in pit-and-fissure caries, 188
incremental addition of, curing and, 550

Composite-cont'd
insertion of, restoration, 494f, 495-496
class 1, 549-550
class II, 494f, 496, 560-561
class III, 516-521
maxillary incisor, 518-519, 520
class IV, 527
class V, 533-534
facial, light-cured, 520
maxillary molar, light-curing and,
494f
technique for, 494f, 495-496
treatment of preparation before, 302
microfill, 477
modified, term of, 191
packable, 478
thermal expansion in, 138t
polishing of. See Polishing.
polyacid-modified resin, 209-210, 478,
478t, 535
composition, structure, and properties
of, 209t
polymerization of, 479-481
properties of, 476, 478-479
comparison of, 202t
resin-modified, 478, 478t. See also Glass
ionomers, resin-modified (IRM;
RMGI).
shear strengths and, 181t
surface texture of, 476-477
types of, 474-478, 478t
Composite Activator, 260
Composite cements, 217-219, 218t, 219t. See
also Cement.
class I and II indirect restoration, 584,
585f-586f
removal of excess in, 586, 587f
composition, structure, and properties
of, 223-224
Composite compule, preloaded, 496f, 518f
Composite connectors in all-porcelain
pontics, 648
Composite resins, 191. See also Composite.
Composite restorations, 190-207, 194t, 202t,
471-500
advantages of, 482-483
beveling of enamel margins in, 300-301,
489-490,491f
class I. See Class I composite
restorations, direct.
class II. See Class II composite
restorations, direct.
class III. See Class III composite
restorations.
class IV See Class IV composite
restorations, direct.
class V See Class V composite
restorations, direct.
class VI. See Class VI composite
restorations.
classification of, 194t, 194-197
clinical application of, 474
clinical considerations for, 206-207
clinical examination of, 410f, 411
conservative, 277, 542-543
contraindications to, 482
controversy in, 498-499
dentin and
bonding of, 28-30
etching and priming of, 298-299
disadvantages of, 483

Composite restorations-cont'd
esthetic materials for
ideal, 473-474
properties of, 478-479
types of, 474-478, 478t
finishing problems of, 498
historical development of, 191-194,
476-478
in final tooth preparation for smoothness
or roughness, 301
indications for, 482
initial procedures in, 483-486
laboratory-processed inlay and onlay, in
class I and II lesions, 573, 574f, 575t
light-curing variables in, 198-202
liners and bases under, 499
materials for, 474-478, 478t. See also
Composite.
matrix systems and, 486, 487f
old, 475
operating area isolation and, 482
operating site preparation in, 483
placement of, 481
poor retention of, 498
preventive resin, 277, 542-543
problems of, 497-498
processed, indications for, 426
repairing of, 497
resistance form of, 291-292
restorative technique in, 492-497
retention form of, bonding systems and,
293
shade selection for, 483-485
terminology for, 190-191
tooth preparations for, 274, 303-304,
486-492
amalgam preparation versus, 487
amalgam replacement, 304t, 489-490,
491f
box-only, 303, 491
conventional, 488-489
beveled, 489-490, 491f
extensions in, 277, 289, 545f
facial/lingual slot, 491-492
modified, 490-491
pulpal protection in, 492
root surface, 298, 529f
treatment of, before insertion of
material, 302
types of, 488-492
treatment planning for, 425
tunnel tooth, 304
Composite restorative materials, term
of, 191. See also Composite
restorations.
Composite veneers, processed, 620, 621-624
repair of, 630-632
Composi-Tight Matrix System, 560f
Composition of material, 137
Compound cones, 560
Compound tooth preparation, 279, 282f,
765f
Compound-supported copper band
matrix, 789-790, 794f-795f
Compound-supported metal matrix
amalgam restoration
class II, 726-729
removal of metal strip of, 729
class 11I, 753
class V, 759-760
complex, 789-790, 794f-795f

I ndex

Compound-supported metal matrix-cont'd
composite restoration
class II, 558-560
class III, 515
class IV, 526-527
Comprehensive medical history form, 389,
390f-391f
Compression, 140
Compressive strengths
of amalgam alloys, 156-157,157t, 654
of dentin, 26
Compule, preloaded composite, 496f,
518f
Computer simulation of treatment outcomes, 473
Computer-aided design (CAD), 221
Computer-assisted manufacturing (CAM),
221
Computer-generated restorations, 9
treatment planning for, 426
Computerized surface digitization (CSD),
defined, 221
Concentration, toxicity and, 144-145
Concentration cell corrosion, 144
amalgam alloys and, 155,155t
Concentricity of bur symmetry, 335
Concise composite, properties of, 202t
Concise enamel bond, penetration coeffi
cient for, 188t
Concise white sealant, penetration coefficient for, 188t
Concrescence, clinical examination of, 412
Condensable composites, 196
Condensation, 149
amalgam restoration insertion and, 665
class I, 682, 690, 725
extensive, 690
class II, 715, 730-731
proximal surfaces and, 715
class III, 753
class V, 760-761, 762f
spherical, 654, 665
working time for, 731
Condensation silicone impression material,
213, 213t
Condenser
for direct gold, 875-876
in class III restorations, 892, 896f, 897,
898f
pneumatic, disadvantage of, 731
Condenser nibs for direct gold, 875, 876
Conduction anesthesia, 437
Conductivity
electrical, 138
thermal, 138
amalgam alloys and, 654
Condylar guidance, lack of anterior, 40, 57f
Condylar motion, articulators and, 55-58
Condyle, mandibular, 45, 47f
Condyle point, 48, 51f
motion of, 50
Condyloma acuminatum, 393, Plate 9-1
Cone bur, 332t
in box-only tooth preparation, 491
Configuration factor (C-factor), 203-204,
243, 479-480, 481f
boxlike class I preparations and, 545
Conservative approaches in operative
dentistry, 3
Conservative bridges. See Bridges,
conservative.

Conservative class I amalgam restorations,
672-687. See also Class I amalgam
restorations, conservative.
Conservative composite restorations
(CCR), 277, 542f, 542-543, 543f
class II, 556
in mandibular premolars for active
lesions, 548
treatment planning and, 540-541
Conservative esthetic procedures, 591-650.
See also Esthetics, conservative.
Contact
alterations of
conservative esthetic procedure,
599-604, 605f
diastema correction in, 601-604,
605f
embrasures in, 601
shape of natural teeth in, 599-601
indirect class I and 11 restoration, 572
cast metal restoration
advantages in control of, 802
occluding of, 862-863
functional or nonfunctional, 862-863
working or nonworking, 862
Contact angle, 140
Contact area
molar, interdental papilla and, 34, 34f
proximal. See Proximal contacts.
Contact Matrix System, 560f
Contact-free area (CFA) wear, 204, 205
Contaminated material disposal, 364
Contamination
airborne, 347-348
control of, dental operatory, 347, 348-349.
See also Infection control.
hand-to-surface, 348-349. See also
Infection control.
protection of complex devices against,
368-369
Contingency table for interpretation of
diagnostic tests, 405f
Continuous phase of composites, 137
Contour
alterations of
control of, in indirect class I and II
restorations, 572
diastema correction and, 601-604, 605f
embrasures and, 601
esthetic dentistry and, 599
esthetic procedures for, 599-604, 605f
shape of natural teeth in, 599-601, 604
control of, cast metal restorations
advantages and, 802
investing tissue, physiology and, 15,
32-33, 33f
loss of, silicate cement restoration failure
with, 475
of adjacent tooth, and outline form for
tooth preparation, 286
of restorations, and periodontal health,
417
proximal, poor, treatment planning for,
425
tooth, 15, 32-33
anatomic, amalgam restorations and,
410
facial convexity and, 32
lingual convexity and, 32
mastication and, 32, 33f
physiology and, 15, 32-33

Contouring
amalgam restoration
class I
conservative, 683-687
occlusolingual, 695
complex, 788f-789f, 792f-793f, 794f-795f,
795
composite restoration, 496-497
class I, 550
class 11, 561-563
large restoration or foundation
with, 565-566
class III, 521-523
class IV, 528
class V, 521f, 522f, 534
problems with, 498
cosmetic, 594, 599-604, 605f
Contouring pliers, 789, 794f-795f
Contra-angled handpieces with internal
turbine drives, 323, 323t, 324f
Contra-angled shanks of instruments, 310
Contraceptives, oral, 399
Contraction gap, 503, 514f, 539
Contraction stresses, 203
Control of pain. See Pain.
Control phase in treatment planning, 422
Control restoration, 765
Conundum, hardness test of, 143t
Convenience form
amalgam restoration, 663
gold restoration, 890-891
in initial tooth preparation, 293-294, 711f
Convenience occlusion, 38
Conventional amalgams, 149-150
Conventional composites, 195
Conventional dry heat ovens, 373
Conventional glass ionomer composites,
478, 478t
Conventional silicone impression material,
213, 213t
Coolants for cutting instruments, 342
Copalite varnish, 172,173f
composition, structure, and properties
of, 174t
Copper amalgam alloy, 148-149, 149t,
151-152,154
corrosion and, 156-157, 157t
high-copper, 654
low-copper, 653-654
mechanical fatigue in, 158
mechanical properties of, 155t
Copper with gold in casting alloys, 215,
215t, 216t
Copper-band matrix, compoundsupported, 789-790, 794f-795f
Copy milling systems, 220t, 220-224, 222b,
223t
Corn cobs, 70f-71f, 77
Coronal dentin, 27, 27f
Coronal plaque, 74t
Coronal pulpal tissue, removal of, 101
Corrosion
chemical, 144
amalgam alloy reactions and, 154
concentration cell, 155, 155t
crevice, 155, 155t
electrochemical, 144,145f
amalgam alloy reactions and, 154,
155t
galvanic, 154-155, 155t
hand instrument, 309, 310

I ndex

Corrosion-cont'd
metallic element, 135
cast metal restorations and, 215, 216217,217
penetrating, 153-154
stress, 155, 155t
Corticosteroids in aphthous ulcers, 398
Corynebacterium species, 73f
Cosmetic contouring, 594, 599-604, 605f
Cost. See Economics.
Cotton roll holder, 465f
Cotton roll isolation, 465-466
in amalgam restorations, 719, 754
in composite restorations, 485-486, 487f
in diastema correction, 602
in initial examination, 405
Council on Dental Materials, Instruments,
and Equipment (CDMIE), 224b
Council on Dental Therapeutics (CDT),
224b
Council on Scientific Affairs of American
Dental Association (CSA ADA),
224-225
Counterbevel, cast metal restorations and
inlay, 819, 820f, 822, 823f
onlay, 829, 830f
Coupling agents
etched porcelain veneers and, 626
history of use of, 192
Coves, retention. See Retention grooves or
coves.
CPG. See Central pattern generator.
Cp-titanium, 138t
CR. See Centric relation (CR).
Crawcour brothers, 158
Craze lines in tooth, 412, 413f
complex amalgam restorations for, 766
Creep, 142
amalgam alloys and, 157,157t, 654
Crevice
corrosion of, 144
amalgam alloys and, 155,155t
gingival, plaque in, 85
Critical items in operatory asepsis
defined, 366
high-level disinfection for, 376. See also
Sterilization.
Cr2o 3 systems in cast metal alloys. See
Chromium-oxide (Cr2o3) systems
in cast metal alloys.
Crossbite, 40-42
Cross-contamination, 348
Crosscutting bur, 332t, 333, 334-335
Cross-infection, 349
Crown
class III restoration tooth preparation for,
505-506
definition of, 281
developmental pits, grooves, and fissures on, 81f
extensive class II composite restorations
for foundation of, 563
lengthening procedures for, 417
natural tooth pontic, 636
short clinical, rubber band isolation for,
463
Crystal
deposition of, odontoblastic processes
and, 98f
gamma-two reaction product, 153
of metal alloy, 135

Crystalline ceramics, 136
Crystalline forms of silicate glass in composites, 192
Crystalline polymer fillers, 196-197
Crystallites
dentinal, 26
in enamel, 18
Crystal-modified composites, 196
Crystobalite in composites, 192
CSA ADA. See Council on Scientific Affairs
of American Dental Association
(CSA ADA).
Cu. See Copper.
Cupralloy, 149t
Curing
composite restoration
class I, 549-550
class II, 560-561
class III, 516-521
class IV, 527
class V, 533-534
cycle of, light-emitting diode technology
and, 202
depth of, 201
laser, 198, 480
light. See Light-cured materials.
of polyvinyl siloxanes, 213-214
pattern of, 201
Curing device for laboratory-processed
composite inlays and onlays, 574f
Curing light output monitoring, 199
Curriculum guidelines for bloodborne
infectious diseases, 350
Cusp
capping of
amalgam restorations and
complex, 765, 769-770
extensive class I, 687-688
extensive class II, 287f, 714, 770f,
774f
cast metal inlay modifications and,
822,823f
class I and II indirect restorations and,
579,581
class II extensive direct composite
restorations and, 563
primary resistance form and, 287f,
290, 291, 300f, 770f, 823f
rules for, 287
cast metal restorations and
inlay, 822-824, 825f, 827f, 828f, 831f
fissures in facial and lingual ridges
and, 819-822
onlay, 829-831
centric, 38
centric holding, 42, 43f, 44f
holding, 38, 42, 43f, 44f
mesiofacial, 40
noncentric, 38, 42-45, 46f
nonholding, 38, 42-45, 46f
non-supporting, 38
occlusion and
nonsupporting, 42-45, 46f
supporting, 42, 43f, 44f
plunger, 418
posterior, occlusion and, 42, 43f
reduction of
cast metal inlays and, 822-824, 825f,
827f, 828f, 831f
wax interocclusal record for, 824,
825f

Cusp-cont'd
reduction of-cont'd
cast metal onlays and, 826
extensive class II restorations and
amalgam, 714
composite, 564, 565f
pin-retained complex amalgam
restorations and, 769-770
resistance form and, 292
ridges of, 42, 43f
stamp, 38, 42, 43f, 44f
supporting, 38
tips of
class I composite preparation extension toward, 546, 547f, 548f
class II amalgam preparation extension toward, 287f, 714, 770f, 774f
precarious or carious pits on
class VI composite restorations for,
543-544
inspection of, 407f, 408, 736f
tooth alignment and, 38, 39f
Cusp-fossa contact, 40
Cuticle, primary enamel, 21
Cutting edge, primary or secondary, 311
Cutting edge angle, 310f, 311
Cutting instruments, 309-322
air-abrasive, 327-329
applications of, 314-315
incorrect, gingival margins and, 761,
762f
cast metal restorations and
inlay, 804
onlay, 826, 828f
categories of, 310
ceramic inlay/onlay tooth preparation
and, 580
class I and II tooth preparations and, 544
design characteristics of, 310, 311f, 329-330
effectiveness of, 340
formulas for operative, 311, 312f, 313f,
314f
hand, 309-322
applications of, 314-315
bevels for, 311-314
categories of, 310
designs of, 310, 311f
early, 309
formulas for, 311, 312f, 313f, 314f
materials for, 309-310
name of, 310-311
shank angles of, 310
sharpening of, 316-322
sterilization and storage of, 309-310, 322
techniques for, 315-316
terminology and classification of,
310-314
hazards with, 227, 342-344
laser, 325t, 325-327, 327t
materials for, 309-310
mechanisms of, 340-342
powered, 322-329
air-abrasive, 327-329
laser, 325t, 325-327, 327t
speed range of rotary, 324-325
rotary, 329-340, 332t, 334t, 337t, 339t
abrasive
coated, 339
diamond, 336-338, 337t
molded, 339
non-diamond, 338-340

I ndex

Cutting instruments-cont'd
rotary-cont'd
dental burs in, 330-336. See also Bur.
design of, 329-330
development of, 322-324, 323t, 325f
speed range of, 324-325
sharpening of, 316-322
sterilization and storage of, 309-310, 322
techniques for, 315-316
class III tooth preparation and, 508f, 512
terminology and classification of, 310-314
Cuttle finishing strip, 897, 898f
Cuttlebone abrasive instruments, 340
hardness values for, 339t
CVS. See Cardiovascular system.
Cyanoacrylate, 188
Cyclobenzaprine, 89t
Cyst, periapical, 413, 414f
Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
epidemiology of, 361
in AIDs patients, 358
symptoms of, 359
D
Dappen dish, 754
Dark zone of incipient caries, 92f, 93t, 94-95
Dead Soft Metal Matrix, 526-527
Dead tracts, 24-26
Debilitated patient, 766
Debris
clinical examination of, 417
sealants and, 187
Decalcification in incipient caries, 101
Decay. See Caries.
Decayed, missing, or filled teeth. See Diseased, missing, or filled (DMF)
teeth.
Decibels, 343
Deep caries excavation, 129
Defects of material, 137
Definitive phase in treatment planning, 422
Deformation of cast metal restorations, 217
Degassing of gold alloys, 874, 875f
Degree-of-conversion, 201, 203
Degree-of-cure, 201
Dehydration, 140
DEJ. See Dentinoenamel junction.
Delayed expansion mechanism, 152
Delayed interfacial marginal leakage,
258-259
Delta hepatitis, 359
Delton pit-and-fissure sealant, 188t
Demineralization
between enamel rods, 93f
carious
advanced,99
dentinal, 97, 98
episodic, 94f, 95
root, 107
clinical examination for, 408
enamel, 78, 79f, 90
cavitation and, 90
fluoride treatment and, 110, 111f
Demographics in operative dentistry, 4
Dens in dente
class I amalgam restorations and, 680f
clinical examination of, 412
Density, 138
of casting alloys, 216
of pure gold, 212
Dental adhesion. See Adhesion.

Dental amalgam alloys, terminology of,
148. See also Alloys; Amalgam.
Dental anomalies, clinical examination of,
412
Dental arches in occlusion, 38-40, 41f
Dental bonding, terminology for, 177. See
also Adhesion; Bonding.
Dental burs. See Bur.
Dental caliper, 595-596
Dental caries. See Caries.
Dental cement. See Cement.
Dental chair, step-by-step preparation of,
367-368, 369f
Dental composites, term of, 191. See also
Composite.
Dental control unit water systems, infection and, 376-378
Dental device regulation, 224b, 225
Dental disease, risk for, 6-7. See also Risk.
Dental expenditures, 5
Dental floss, 114
in initial examination, 405
in testing proximal surface contours and
margins
for class II composite restoration, 522
for complex amalgam restoration, 794
suture needle with, fixed bridge isolation and, 461, 462f
technique for, 115, 116f, 117f, 118f, 119f
Dental granuloma, 413, 414f
Dental history, 400, 401t
Dental insurance, 5
Dental luting cement, 186-187
Dental manpower, 7
Dental materials, 133-234. See also specific
material.
biomechanics and, 145-148
definitions for, 135-145
categories in, 135-137
properties in, 137-145, 138t, 143t
structure in, 137
development of new, 3-4
moisture contamination prevention for,
445
properties of, 137-145, 138t, 143t
biologic, 144-145
chemical, 143-144,145f
mechanical, 140-143, 143t, 144f
physical, 137-140, 138t
restoration, 148-224. See also
Restorations.
direct, 148-212
amalgam in, 148-170. See also
Amalgam.
dental adhesion in, 177-187,181t.
See also Adhesion.
liners and bases in, 170-177, 174t,
175t, 176t. See also Liners and
bases.
pit and fissure sealants in, 187-190,
188t. See also Pit-and-fissure
sealants.
indirect, 212-224
cast metal, 214-217, 215t, 216t. See
also Cast metal restorations.
cements in, 217-220, 218t, 219t. See
also Cement.
i mpression materials for, 212-214,
213t. See also Impressions.
machined, 220t, 220-224, 222b, 223t
safety and efficacy in, 224b, 224-228

Dental materials-cont'd
restoration-cont'd
sterilization of, 302-303
thickness of
amalgam and, 658-659
primary resistance form and, 290
structure of, 137
toxicity of, 9
biologic property and, 144-145
safety for professionals and, 226-228
standards programs and, 224b, 224-226
Dental office
bleaching in
nonvital, 608-609
vital, 610
effluent from, 167
mercury management in, 158-165, 160t,
161b
standards for, 226
Dental operatory. See Operatory.
Dental papilla, 95
Dental professionals, safety for, 226-229
Dental pulp, 30
blood supply of, 99
composition of, 30
function of, 30
infection of, final tooth preparation and,
302-303
necrosis of, 31
protection of
liners and bases for, 170, 171-174
microleakage and, 254
temperature changes and, 138
Dental pulp cavity, 15, 30-31
pulpitis in, 31
Dental pulpitis, 31
Dental radiographs. See Radiography.
Dental schools
infection control manual of standard operating procedures for, 351-352
number of students in, 7
Dental students, exposure control plan for,
351-352
Dental team, positions of, 431-434
Dental unit
asepsis for attachments to, 366
introduction of, 323, 323t
preparation of, 367-368, 369f
Dental wax. See Wax.
Dentastic Uno, 247t
Dentifrice, abrasion from, 205
Dentin
adhesion to, 239-261, 241t, 244b,
247t-248t, 248b. See also Dentin
bonding systems.
biocompatibility in, 255-256
challenges in, 240-244
clinical factors in, 257-258
current strategies for, 247t-248t,
247-250, 248b
desensitization in, 258
hybrid layer in, 250-251, 252f
in vitro studies in, 256-257
microleakage in, 254-255
moist versus dry surfaces in, 246f,
251-254
proteins in, 254
restorations and
amalgam, 258-259, 718
direct composite, 492-494
indirect, 259-261

I ndex

Dentin-cont'd
adhesion to-cont'd
substrates and, 240-243, 245
total-etch systems for, 246f, 247, 248
affected, 100
tooth preparation and, 277-278, 279f
aging and, 146-148, 736
anatomy, histology and physiology of,
22-31
attrition removal of enamel and, 736
bond strength between amalgam and, 259
bonding systems for. See Dentin bonding
systems.
caries of. See Dentinal caries.
color of, 26
composition of, 26
volume percentage in, 242f
compressive strength of, 26
coronal, 27
darkening of, aging and, 206
eburnated, 26, 276. See also Brown spots.
clinical examination for, 408
treatment planning for, 424
etching and priming of, in final tooth
preparation, 298-299
hardness of, 26
odontoblastic processes and, 98f
values for, 339t
hybridized, contraction gap and, 503, 514f
in dental pulp function, 30
indirect porcelain veneers contraindicated for, 627
infected, removal of, 99, 100
amalgam restoration and
class 1, 677-679, 680f, 681f, 693
class 111, 748
cast metal restoration and
inlay, 808-812
onlay, 829
class V composite restorations and,
529,531
final, 294-295, 302-303
initial, 277-278, 279f
intertubular
bonding for, 182, 240
remineralization of, 97
microfractures of, 766
modulus of elasticity of, 26
necrotic, 99
normal, 99
peritubular
apposition of, 97
bonding for, 240
permeability of, 27, 242-243
pin extension into, 772-773
primary, 23
pattern of formation of, 22-23
pulpal protection in restorations and,
171,255
reflectance of, 26
reparative or tertiary, 24, 25f, 98-99
rewetting of, 493-494, 514, 548
sclerotic, 26, 97-98, 257
advanced carious lesions and, 100
clinical examination for, 408
treatment planning for, 424
secondary, 24
shear strengths and, 181t
smooth enamel plaque and, 86f, 92
sound of tine over, 26
staining of, 100

Dentin-cont'd
stress transfer of, 146
substrates of, adhesion and, 240-243,
245
subtransparant, 99
tensile strength of, 26
thickness of, 240
transparant, 98, 99
turbid, 99
Young's modulus and, 250, 257
Dentin adhesion. See Dentin, adhesion to.
Dentin bonding systems, 182-185. See also
Adhesion.
acetone- or ethanol-based, 251
beginning of use of, 244, 244t
biocompatibility of, 255-256
challenges in, 240-244
clinical factors in, 257-258
current strategies for, 247t-248t, 247-250,
248b
desensitization and, 258
development of, 244t, 244-250, 247t-248t,
248b
generations of adhesives in, 241t,
244-247, 247t-248t, 248b
hybrid layer in, 250-251, 252f
hydrophilic agents in, 180
in vitro studies of, 256-257
indirect restorations and, 259-261
microleakage in, 254-255
micromechanical retention of, 183, 184f
moist versus dry surfaces in, 241t, 245247, 246f, 247t-248t, 248b, 251-254
new clinical indications for, 258-261
proteins in, 254
restorations and
amalgam, 258-259
extensive class 1, 688-689
composite, 28-30, 492-494
class 111, 516-517
phosphoric acid in, 29
preliminary steps for, 492-494
shear strengths and, 181t
Dentin desensitizers, 186
amalgam restorations and, 186
class 1, 679-680, 682f
extensive, 688, 689, 690
class 111, 753
in adhesion, 258
Dentin sealers. See Dentin desensitizers.
Dentinal caries, 95-99
clinical characteristics of, 82f, 86f, 95-99
zones of, 99
incipient lesion and, 92f, 93t, 94-95
Dentinal crystallites, 26
Dentinal fluid, 27, 27f
Dentinal microfractures, 766
Dentinal staining, 100
Dentinal surface etching in glass-ionomer
restorations, 535
Dentinal tubules, 23-26, 95
bonding and, 240, 243f
clefts in, 99
Copalite varnish occluding, 173f
fluid flow from, 171-172
fluid movements in, 27
infection prevention for, 302-303
sealing of, in final tooth preparation,
295, 297, 301-303
Dentinal walls of tooth preparation, 275f,
280

Dentinocemental junction in pulp-dentin
complex, 23, 24f
Dentinoenamel junction, 17, 20, 21f, 275f,
280
caries formation at, 274
pit-and-fissure, 82f, 91
resistance to, 96
pinhole placement and, 774
pulp-dentin complex and, 23, 24f
tooth preparation and
amalgam restoration, 659
class 1, 676, 692
class V, 676
box-only, 491
facial/lingual slot, 491
Dentinogenesis, 23
Dentinogenesis imperfecta, 279, 412
Dentin-resin interface stress, 243-244
Dentist prescribed-home applied
technique for bleaching teeth,
610-612
Dentistry
effect of infections on, 347-350
evidence-based, 389
operative. See Operative dentistry.
Dentists, number of, 7
Dentition
anatomy, histology and physiology of,
15
primary, 15
Denture, removable partial, restorations
for abutment teeth of
amalgam, 713
class 11, 721
class V, 744
complex, 765
cast metal, 801
treatment planning and, 423
Denture tooth pontic, 638-640
Depth cuts, 822, 823f, 826
Depth gauge grooves, 822, 823f
Depth of cure, 201
Desensitizers
amalgam restorations and
class 1, 679-680, 682f
extensive, 688, 689, 690
complex, 787
dentin. see Dentin desensitizers.
Design
of cutting instruments, 310, 311f,
329-330
tooth preparation
amalgam, 664
composite, 488-492
Desquamated epithelial cells, plaque and,
88
Developing countries, caries status in,
68
Developmental discolored spots, microabrasion for, 613
Developmental grooves, 38
Diagnosis. See Examination and diagnosis.
Diametral tension or compression, 141
Diamond instruments, 336-338, 337t
acid-etched, resin-bonded splinting and,
633
all-porcelain pontics and, 649
ceramic inlay/onlay restorations and
finishing and polishing in, 585, 586f,
587,587t
tooth preparation for, 580, 581f

I ndex

Diamond instruments-cont'd
composite restoration preparations and
class 1, 544, 547, 549f
class II, 551-556, 557
class III, 509, 511f, 512, 514, 521, 523
class IV, 525
class V, 528, 530, 533
class VI, 542, 544
contouring in, 497
cutting action of, 341
esthetic tooth contour alterations with,
599-600
hardness test of, 143t
introduction of, 323, 323t
porcelain fused-to-metal resin-bonded
bridges and, 643
recommendations for use of, 342
uniformity in, 338
Diamond stones, 317
class I amalgam restoration and, 685, 686f
composite restorations and, 489, 490, 491
class I11, 507, 510, 511f
repairing, 497
micron finishing, glass-ionomer restorations and, 536
Diastema
correction of
cast metal restorations in, 801
contact alterations and, 595, 596,
601-604, 605f
etiology of, 601
Diazepam in older adults, 400
Dicor glass-ceramic material, 223t, 575t,
576
Dicor MGC, 223t, 575t
Dies
cast metal restorations and. See Working
casts and dies.
inspection of, 847, 848f
laboratory-processed ceramic inlay and
onlay, 575, 576f
Die-spacing medium for indirect etched
porcelain veneers, 627
Diet, 88, 113
Difficulty in breathing, 437
Diffusion, enamel, 140
Diffusion adhesion, 237
Diffusion bonding, 237
Diffusivity, thermal, 138
Digital contamination of surfaces in
operatory, 347. See also Infection
control.
Dilaceration, 412
Dilatant behavior, 143, 144f
Dipentaerythritol penta-acrylate monophosphate (PENTA), 244t, 245
Diphtheria and pertussis immunization,
361
Direct full veneers, 618-620
Direct gold, 873-877. See also Gold alloys.
Direct gold restorations, 871-899. See also
Gold restorations.
Direct partial veneers, 617-618
Direct pulp capping, 100, 129
in tooth preparation for composite
restorations, 492
Direct rear position, 432, 433
Direct restorations, tooth-colored. See
Tooth-colored restorations.
Direct restorative dentistry, defined, 148.
See also Restorations.

Direct-filling gold in restorations, 211-212
disadvantages of, 212, 878
Direct-filling resins with polymethyl
methacrylate, 138t
Disclusion of posterior teeth, 61
Discoid instruments, 314, 314f, 315
flattening of, 321
in amalgam carving, 665
in class I restorations, 683-687
Discoloration
acrylic resin and, 476
at root surface areas, 107
clinical examination for, 408, 409, 410f
conventional composites and, 477
esthetic procedures for, 605-608
extrinsic, 605-606
from pins in composite restorations, 524,
525f
intrinsic, 606-608
localized or generalized, 606
of enamel adjacent to restoration,
123-124
of hand instruments, 309, 310
remineralization and, 90
silicate cement restoration failure with,
475
veneers and, 627
Diseased, missing, or filled (DMF) teeth,
5t, 5-6, 68
Disinfectants, 366-367
for transporting or soaking used instruments, 370
for water system contamination, 378
high-level, in sterilization, 376
Disinfection
of restorative material, 302-303
of semicritical and noncritical items in
operatory, 366-367
Disocclusion of posterior teeth, 61
Disopyramide, 89t
Dispersalloy
composition and classification of, 149t
fatigue curve for, 143
mechanical properties of, 157t
Dispersed phase of composites, 137
Disposable masks, 344
Disposable needle, 437, 439f-440f
Disposal, waste. See Waste disposal.
Dissolution, chemical, 144
Distal bevel, 313
Distal cusp ridge, 42, 43f
Distal fissure in amalgam restoration
enameloplasty, 677
Distal tilt to conserve dentin support, 690,
691f
Distal tooth surface preparation, 279, 283,
765f
Distofacial extension in amalgam restorations, 717
Distoincisal corner of canine, 746, 747f
Distolingual class III amalgam tooth
preparation, 751f, 752f
Distolingual cusp in pin-retained complex
amalgam restoration, 788f-789f
Distoocclusal preparation, 281-283
for amalgam restoration, 709-710
for cast metal inlay, 804f, 808
for cast metal onlay, 835
Distoocclusolingual preparation, 819,
820f
lingual groove extension of, 820f

Distoocclusolingual preparation-cont'd
modified for fissures in facial and lingual cusp ridges or marginal
ridges, 819-822
Ditch cut. See Proximal ditch cut.
Ditching, marginal, 409-410
class V gold restorations and, 888
fracture and, 158
treatment planning for, 425
Diuretics
salivary flow and, 89t
side effects of, 400
Divergence angle, retention form and, 293
DMF teeth. See Diseased, missing, or filled
( DMF) teeth.
Documentation notebook for sterilization,
375-376
Dosimeters for mercury management, 162
Double-ended instruments, 310, 311f, 312
Double-wedging technique, 722f
Dovetail retention form, 805, 806f
Drills
broken, pin-retained amalgam restorations and, 783
for pilot hole, 775-778
Kodex, 775, 776f
Drug interactions, 400
Drugs in operating field, 469
Dry heat sterilization, 373-374
Dry versus moist surfaces in dentin adhesion, 241t, 245-247, 247t-248t,
248b, 251-254
Dual cured composites, 197
Dual-cured liners in bonding of amalgam
to dentin, 259
Ductile fracture, 340
Ductile materials, 141
diamond instruments and, 341
Durafluor, 190
Duraphat, 190
Durelon, 176t
DYCAL liners, 175t, 176t
Dynamic occlusal relationships, 37-38, 418
Dyract, 209t
Dysrhythmias, 436
E
Eames technique for amalgam alloy, 150
Ear precautions, cutting instruments and,
343
EasyBond, 247t
EBA-modified zinc oxide-eugenol cement.
See Ethoxybenzoate-modified
(EBA) zinc oxide-eugenol cement.
Eburnated dentin, 26, 90, 276. See also
Brown spots.
clinical examination for, 408
in treatment planning, 424
EBV See Epstein-Barr virus (EBV).
Ecologic determinants in plaque development, 74-90. See also Plaque.
terminology of, 69
Ecologic succession, 73f, 76
Ecological niche, 75
Economics, 4-5
restorations and
cast metal, 802
complex amalgam, 765-766
tooth preparation for, 273
tooth-colored class I and II indirect,
571,572

I ndex

Ecosystem, 74
Ectoderm, 17
ED, laser. See Exposure dose (ED), laser.
Edentulism, trends in, 6
Edge angle, 336
EDTA. See Ethylene diamine tetra-acetic
acid (EDTA).
Efficacy in dental materials use, 224b,
224-228
rubber dam isolation and, 445-446
Efficiency of operator, local anesthesia and,
436
Effluent from dental offices, 167
EIA. See Enzyme-linked immunoassay
(EIA).
Elastic bending of tooth, 411
Elastic impression material, 142
cast metal restorations and, 802
Elastic limit, 141, 142
of cast metal restorations, 217
Elastic modulus, 141, 143. See also Young's
modulus.
biomechanics and, 148
composites and, 204, 479
Elastic strain, 141, 142-143
Elasticity of microfill composites, 477. See
also Elastic modulus.
Elastomeric polymer matrices in impression materials, 213
Elderly. See Aging.
Electric motor for power cutting instruments, 323, 323t
Electric pulp tester, 415, 418
Electrical conductivity, 138
Electrical protection for dental pulp in
restorations, 170
Electrochemical cell, 144, 145f
Electrochemical corrosion, 144, 145f
in amalgam alloy reactions, 154, 155t
Electromagnetic spectrum, 140
Electro-Mallet for direct gold, 875, 876
Electroplating of hand instruments, 309
Electrostatic adhesion, 237
11-o'clock position, 431, 432f
Elipar Highlight (ESPE), 202
Embrasures, 33-35
gingival, 34
in all-porcelain pontics, 649
in class III composite restorations,
522-523
in esthetic dentistry, 599-600, 601
incisal, 34f, 599-600
occlusal, 34f
overcontouring of restorations and, 33f
proximal, carving of, 666
Emergence angles, 599
Emergency incident plan, 354-355
Emergency procedures, 443
Emergency visit, 389
Eminences, articular, 45
Employee training
hazard communications and, 226-227
on bloodborne pathogens, OSHArequired, 356-358
responsibilities for, 228
Enamel
abutment tooth, porcelain fused-to-metal
or all-metal pontics and, 640
acid etching of, 21-22, 238-239, 240f
composite restorations and, 492-494

Enamel-cont'd
adhesion to, 238-239
advantages of, 238
basic concepts of, 237-238
bonding systems and, 181, 181t,
182f
composite restorations and, 492-494
anatomy, histology and physiology of,
16-22
attrition removal of, 736
beveling of, 206, 298
caries in
active, 65f, 83, 84f, 114f
clinical characteristics of, 93t, 93-94,
94t, 107f, 111f
radiographic evidence of, 406f
histopathology of, 92-95
incipient smooth-surface lesion in,
65f, 87f, 93t, 93-94, 94t, 107f, 111f,
743
zones of incipient lesion in, 92f, 93t,
94-95
small, class V composite restorations
for, 531
smooth surface
diagnosis of, 105-107
initiation site of, 86f, 91-92
terminology for, 275
chemistry of, 17
coalesced, occlusal fissure segmented by,
712
composition of, by volume percentage,
242f
crystallites in, 18, 18f
cutting of, porcelain fused-to-metal
resin-bonded bridges and, 643
demineralization of, 78, 79f, 90
diffusion through, 140
discoloration of, 123-124
gnarled, 19, 299, 816
hardness of, 17, 143t, 339t
histology of, 70f-71f, 92-93
hypocalcified, 93
examination and diagnosis of, 411
indirect etched porcelain veneers for,
626f
nonhereditary, 411
hypoplasia of, nonhereditary, 593f
direct full veneers for, 279, 618-620. See
also Enamel, hypocalcified.
indirect etched porcelain veneers for,
624,625f
isolation of proximal, in class II amalgam preparation, 699-701
margins in
class I amalgam restorations and, 514,
676
friable, removal of, 513, 514
halo around, 497
modified, composite restorations and,
490-491
strength of, 272f, 276f, 280-281, 676f,
702f
white line around, 497
maturation of, 21
nonhereditary hypoplasia of, 279, 593f,
618f
veneers for, 615f
occlusal, amalgam restorations and,
659

Enamel-cont'd
pit or fissure in
class I amalgam restoration and,
677-679, 680f, 681f
tooth preparation and, 294-295
plaque and, 70f-71f, 72f
roughness at termination in, 84
smooth surface, 80f, 83, 84f, 85f, 86f,
87f, 114f
shear strengths and, 181t
stress transfer of, 146
thickness of, 17
translucent, 17
healthy gingiva and, 66f
veneersfor
indirect porcelain, 627
nonhereditary hypoplasia and, 615f
preparation of, 616
Enamel cuticle, primary, 21
Enamel hatchet, 313f, 315
in class II amalgam tooth preparation,
701-702
in class II cast metal inlays, 808
Enamel lamellae, 19, 20f
Enamel rods or prisms, 17-19
histology of, 92
tooth preparation and, 275f, 299, 301f
amalgam restoration, 702f
composite restoration, 490, 491f
class I, 547
class II, 554
Enamel spindles, 19, 20f
Enamel tufts, 19, 20f
Enamel walls, tooth preparation and, 275f,
280
class III composite restoration, 514
line angles formed at junction in, 300
placement of etchant in, 298
Enameloplasty
in cast metal inlays, 804, 805, 806f
with fissures in facial and lingual cusp
ridges, 819, 821, 822f
in class I amalgam restorations, 676-677
in initial tooth preparation, 287f,
289-290, 677f, 821f
for pit-and-fissure restoration, 287,
677f, 806f
in extension for prevention, 277,
677f
End cutting fissure bur, 332t
Endocarditis, bacterial, 399
Endodontics
cast metal restorations and, 801
onlay, 836
in treatment planning, 422
Energy delivered by laser, 326
Energy flow through plaque community,
78, 79f, 88
Engerix-B, 360
Engineering controls, term of, 352
Environment
infection control and, 347-349, 366
toxic amalgams and, 165-168, 653
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
167, 228, 351
Enzyme-linked immunoassay (EIA), 357
EPA. See Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA).
Epidemiology
clinical, 405

I ndex

Epidemiology-cont'd
of infections
in AIDS/HIV, 356
in viral hepatitis, 349-350, 358-361
other than hepatitis, 361
Epinephrine
combined with local anesthetics,
434-435,435t
drug interactions with, 400
tricyclic antidepressants in, 399
dysrhythmias and, 436
lidocaine with, 434-435, 435t
on retraction cord, 754
overdose of, 443
patient position and, 437
smallest volume of, effective, 442
Epithelial cells, desquamated, plaque and,
88
Epithelium, stratified squamous, 35
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), 394t-395t
epidemiology of, 361
in infectious mononucleosis, 396
symptoms of, 359
Equipment safety, 226-228
Erbium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet
(Er:YAG) laser, 326, 327
Erosion
chemical
clinical examination of, 411, 412f
veneers for, 615f
class V composite restoration tooth
preparation and, 531-532
idiopathic
clinical examination of, 411, 412f
tooth defect of, 278, 411f
treatment planning in, 424
wear, 114f
Er:YAG laser. See Erbium:yttriumaluminum-garnet (Er:YAG)
laser.
Escape channels, cement displacement
and, 220
Escherichia coli, 76
ESPE. See Elipar Highlight (ESPE).
Ester anesthetics, 435
Esthetic vitality, 598
Esthetics
artistic elements with, 593-599
alignment in, 596-597
clinical considerations for, 599
color in, 597-598
form in, 594-595
position in, 596-597
proportionality in, 595-596, 604
shape in, 594-595
surface texture in, 597
symmetry in, 595-596
translucency in, 598-599
cast metal restorations and, 802
inlay, 817
onlay, 835-836, 866f, 868f
class I and 11 indirect restorations and,
571
complex amalgam restorations and,
765-766
conservative, 591-650
acid-etched, resin-bonded splints in,
632-636
artistic elements with, 593-599
bleaching treatments in, 608-612

Esthetics-cont'd
conservative-cont'd
bridges in, 636-649. See also Bridges,
conservative.
contact alterations in, 599-604, 605f
discolorationsin, 605-608
intrinsic, 606-608
macroabrasion and, 613-615
microabrasion and, 612-613
tooth contour alterations in, 594f,
599-604,605f
diastema correction and, 601-604,
605f
embrasures and, 601
shape of natural tooth and, 599-601
veneers in, 593f, 615-632. See also
Veneers.
defined, 593
direct composite restorations and,
473-478, 478t, 503
class IV, 523
class V, 528
ideal, 473-474
lifespan of, 474
function and, 599
future for operative dentistry and, 7-8
in extensions in tooth preparations, 289
in projected need for operative dentistry,
7-8
in treatment planning, 424, 425
i ndividual perception of, 473
machined restorations and, 222-223
need for restorations and, 271, 273
notched lesion in, 532
outline form in tooth preparation for,
286
Etched composite veneers, 621-624
Etched porcelain veneers, 620, 621,
624-627, 628f
trimming of overextension in, 625, 626
Etching
acid. See Acid-etching.
amalgam restorations and, extensive
class 1, 689-690
composite restorations and, 492-493
class 1, 548-549
class 11, 558
large or foundation, 565
class 111, 514-515
class IV, 526
class V, 533
machined restorations and, 222, 223f
of dentinal surfaces in glass-ionomer
restorations, 535
retention form and, 293
Ethanol flame for degassing gold, 874,
875f
Ethanol-based dentin adhesive system, 251
Ethoxybenzoate-modified (EBA) zinc
oxide--eugenol cement, 217, 218t
Ethyl acetate in pontic technique, 639
Ethyl alcohol disinfection, 367
Ethyl cellulose in fluoride varnish, 190
Ethylene diamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA),
244t
in smear layer treatment, 29f, 245
Ethylene oxide sterilization (ETOX), 374
Etidocaine with epinephrine, 435t
ETOX sterilization. See Ethylene oxide sterilization (ETOX).

Eugenol. See also Zinc oxide-eugenol
(ZOE) cement.
liners and, 173-174
pulpal protection with, 175-176
Evacuators
high-volume, 466-467,468f
contamination from spatter and
aerosol and, 378
placement of, 467
tip of, 467, 468f
for retraction, 469
Evidence-based dentistry, 389
Examination and diagnosis, 401t, 401-421,
406-416, 413b
for abrasions, 412
for amalgam restorations, 409-410, 411f
for attrition, 412
for caries, 102, 104t, 401t, 406-409
and schematic representation of staging, 107
for cast restorations, 410
for chemical erosion, 411, 412f
for composite and other tooth-colored
restorations, 410f, 411
for idiopathic erosion, 411, 412f
for nonhereditary, hypocalcified enamel,
411
for occlusal problems, 417-418
general considerations for, 402-406
interpretation and test use in, 405-406
of orofacial soft tissues, 394t-395t, 406,
Plate 9-1
of patient in pain, 418-421, 419b
periodontium review in, 416-417
charting results of, 404f
preparation for, 405
tooth preparation for restorations and,
273
with adjunctive aids, 414-416
with electric pulp tester, 415
with palpation, 415
with percussion test, 414-415
with radiography, 401t, 406f, 409f,
412-413, 413b, 414f
with study casts, 416
with thermal test, 415
Excavation site, isolation of, 127, 128f
Excavators, 311, 312f
applications for, 314
categories of, 310
flattening of, 321
Exchange of instruments, 434
Excimer lasers, 325t, 326, 327, 327t
Excite, 247, 247t
Excursion in mandibular movement, 50
Explorer tip
hazards of, in caries diagnosis, 104
in shaping and contouring amalgam, 695
Exposure
definition of, 352
diamond abrasive instruments and, 338
risks of
federal and state regulations to
reduce, 350-356
infection control and, 347-350
injury and, 364
root surface, pain in, 421
Exposure assessment protocol, 361-364
Exposure badges, 162
Exposure control plan, 350, 351-354

920

I ndex

Exposure dose (ED), laser, 326
Exposure incident plan, 354-355
Exposure time, toxicity and, 144
Extension
amalgam restoration, 658, 659f
for prevention as principle in tooth
preparation, 277
and composite restorations, 277, 545f
and enameloplasty, 277, 677f
and pit-and-fissure sealants, 277, 542f
and preventive resins, 277, 543f
gingival floor, initial tooth preparation
and, 291, 717f, 827f
primary resistance form and, 287f, 290,
291, 300f, 409f, 823f
smooth-surface tooth preparations and,
289
Extensive class I amalgam restorations,
687-690
Extensive class II amalgam restorations,
287f, 703f, 704f, 714, 715
Extensive class II composite restorations,
563-567
Extensive occlusal wear in bruxism, 572f
External wall of tooth preparation,
279-280
amalgam restoration tooth preparation
and
class I, 677-679, 680f, 681f
class 11, 706-708
Extracoronal tooth preparation, 279f, 281
Extrinsic discoloration, 605-606
Eye precautions
for cutting instruments, 343
glasses for, 343, 363
cleaning of instruments and, 370
herpes simplex virus and, 393
tuberculosis and, 398
E-Z gold
compaction technique for, 876, 877
degassing procedure for, 874
restorations and
class 1, 879-880
class III, 889, 891
class V, 886, 888f
uses of, 878
F
Face
of hand cutting instrument, design of,
310
of operator, patient proximity to, 433
Face shield for cleaning instruments, 370
Facial access
in class III tooth preparations
for amalgam restorations in mandibular canine, 745, 752
for composite restorations, 504, 506,
510-512,513f
in class IV tooth preparations, 526, 527
Facial contours, desired change in, 761
Facial convexity, 32
Facial crossbite, 40-42
Facial cusp ridge, 42, 43f
fissures in, inlay and, 819-822
Facial embrasure, correct or incorrect, 730
Facial occlusal line, 38, 39f
Facial proximal extension in conventional
tooth preparation, 551,552
Facial secondary flare in cast metal inlay
preparation, 813-814

Facial surfaces
caries of, 87f
cast metal restoration modifications and
inlay, 824-826, 827f
onlay, 829-831
contouring and polishing composite on,
521-522
gingival portion of
initial tooth preparation and, 289
treatment planning and, 425
molar, restorations on occlusal two
thirds of, 281
Facial/lingual areas
carving of, in amalgam restorations, 666
slot tooth preparations for composite
restorations in,491-492,557-558
Faciolingual line angle, 283
amalgam restoration
class II, 714-715
class III, 746
Faciolingual width
amalgam restoration, 676
cast metal restorations and, 806, 807f
composite restoration, 551-552
Faciolinguoincisal point angle, 283
Facultative organisms, 73f
Fainting, 437, 443
False negatives or false positives, 405
Famciclovir
in herpes simplex virus infection, 392
in varicella-zoster virus infection, 393,
395t
Fatigue, 143
bond strength and, 180
Fatigue curve, 143
Fatigue fracture in all-porcelain pontics,
648
Faulty veneers in metal restorations,
631-632
FCA wear. See Functional contact area
(FCA).
FDA. See Food and Drug Administration
(FDA).
FDI. See Federation Dentaire Internationale
(FDI).
Fe-Cr. See Iron-chromium (Fe-Cr).
Federal regulations to reduce exposure
risks, 350-356. See also Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA).
Federation Dentaire Internationale (FDI),
224b,225
bur classification and, 331
Feldspathic porcelain
hardness values for, 339t
in inlays and onlays for class I and II
lesions, 574-575, 575t, 576f
in veneers, 620, 621, 624-627, 628f
modified, 222, 223t
treatment planning for, 426
Feminine smile, 594, 599
Fenfluramine, 399
Ferracane wear simulator, 206
Ferrier direct gold restorations, 889
Ferrier separator, 891, 892f
Fetal development, mercury and, 163-164
Fever blisters, 392
Fiber-modified homogeneous minifill, 195
Fiber-optic transillumination (FOTI), 408
Field, operative, 444-469, 448t. See also
Operating field.

Fifth-generation adhesives in dentin
bonding systems, 241t, 245-247,
247t-248t, 248b
Filamentous bacteria, 73, 74f, 74t, 91
supragingival, 86
Files, 314f, 315
Filings of amalgam alloy mixed with mercury, 149
Filled composite. See also Composite.
addition method for, 194
content of, 194
crystalline polymer, 196-197
level ranges for, 194, 194t
modified for desirable changes, 192
nonsilicate, 196
particle size in, 194-196, 197f
light-curing process and, 201
term of, 191
Filled polymers for indirect restorations, 573
Filled resins, term of, 191. See also Composite restorations.
Filler phase of composites, 137. See also
Filled composite.
Final OSHA Rule on Bloodborne
Pathogens, 352-354
Final tooth preparation stage. See Tooth
preparation, final stage of.
Fine finishing composite, 195
Fine particle composite, 195
Finishing
amalgam restoration, 666
class I
conservative, 683-687
occlusolingual, 695
class 11, 734-735
class III, 753
class V, 761-762
complex, 788f-789f, 792f-793f, 795
composite restoration, 192, 193, 195. See
also specific restoration class.
class I, 550
class 11, 561-563
class III, 521-523
indirect dentistry and, 584-587, 587t,
588f
external wall, final tooth preparation,
299-301
gold restoration
class I, 880, 881f
class V, 888
enamel wall, class 111, 891
pontic, porcelain fused-to-metal resinbonded bridges and, 643-644
Firmalay, 216t
First Amalgam War, 158-159
First-generation adhesives in dentin bonding, 244
Fish, mercury in, 164
Fissures, enamel, 38, 276-277. See also Pit or
fissure.
caries-free, superficial stain in, 66f
facial or lingual cusp ridge, cast metal
restorations and, 819-822
groove extension in, 817, 818f
mesial or distal, class I amalgam restoration and, 677
premolar or molar, 20, 21f
removal of remaining, final tooth preparation and, 294-295
sealants of. See Pit-and-fissure sealants.
union of developmental lobes in, 16

I ndex

Fit of cast metal restorations, 217
5-o'clock position, 432
Fixed appliances
in orthodontic treatments, 634-635
in treatment planning, 423
Fixed bridge isolation, 461, 462f
Flame finishing bur, 332t
Flap procedure in class V amalgam
restoration, 744
Flares
cast metal restorations and
inlay, 808, 812-816
onlay, 829, 830f
primary, 812
secondary, cast metal
inlay, 812, 813-814, 815-816
onlay, 829, 830f
Flash in class I amalgam restorations, 684
Flexible restorations, 204
Flexion, 141
Flexner report, 2
Flexural strength
of gold, 212
of machined restorations, 224
Flexuring of tooth, 411
Floor of tooth preparation, 279f, 280
flat, primary resistance form and, 290,
291
Flossing. See Dental floss.
Flow
amalgam alloy, 654
composite, 196, 202t, 477-478
sandwich technique and, 304
Fluid flow physics in dentinal tubules, 27,
171-172
Fluid resin in adhesion strategies, 241t
Fluidity of mixture, 192
Fluor Protector, 190
Fluorapatite, 110
Fluorescence, 139
Fluorescent antibody tests, 357
Fluoridation, 110-112, 111t, 113t
adverse reaction to. See Fluorosis.
enamel surface and, 21
glass ionomers and, 210, 211, 535
history of use of, 65
notched carious lesion and, 532
operative dentistry and, 5
pit-and-fissure sealants with varnishes
and gels and, 190
sealants and, 189
Fluorite, hardness test of, 143t
Fluoro-alumino-silicate glass-ceramics,
222
Fluorosis, 606, 609-610
microabrasion for, 613, 614f
veneers for, 615f
Flutes, 84, 335
Foil test, ultrasonic cleaner, 371
Food
composite wear and, 204, 205
machined restorations and, 223
mercury in, 164
Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
224b,225
antiviral medications and, 393
fluoride varnishes and, 190
gloves and, 362
mercury use and, 159
Food red 106, 100
Forceps, retainer, 448, 449f

Form
in esthetic procedures, 594-595
medical history, 389, 390f-391f
Forward caries, 275
Fossae, 38, 39f, 276-277
enamel, primary, 21f
glenoid, 45, 47f
in caries formation, 274
in clinical examination for caries, 21f,
407
FOTI. See Fiber-optic transillumination
(FOTI).
Foundations
amalgam. See Amalgam foundations.
under indirect composite restorations of
extensive class II, 563-567
Four-handed dentistry, development of, 3
Fourth-generation adhesives for dentin
bonding, 241t, 245, 246f, 248b
Fraction-grip angle handpiece, 329-330
Fracture
all-porcelain pontics bridges and, 648
alveolar bone, 635
amalgam alloy, 157-158
bulk, 169
class I and 11 indirect restorations
and, 587
posterior, 207
bond strength and, 179-180
brittle, 340
ductile, 340
fatigue, 648
machined restorations and, 222
porcelain and ceramic restoration, 186
tooth, 278, 412f, 417f
anterior, fragments of, 238f
cast metal onlay for cusp in, 829-831
class IV modified preparation for,
525-526
endodontic treatment and, 836
mandibular incisor, 767
mandibular molar, 829-831
pin-retained restoration in, 788f-789f
marginal ridge, 667
mesioincisal corner, 524-525
micro-, intraoral loads and, 146, 147f,
148, 148f
posterior
pain evaluation in, 418-421
vital pulp exposed in, 421
restorations for, 271
complex amalgam, 766
risk for, cast metal restorations and,
801
traumatic, 635
Fracture line in tooth, 412, 413f
Frame, rubber dam isolation, 446, 454-455
Frictional heat, 340
Friction-locked pins, 771-772
Fuji II, 209t
Fuji IX, 129, 130f
Fuji Lining LC, 175t
Full-arch casts mounted on semiadjustable
articulator, 837, 839f
Functional contact area (FCA)
marking of, 862
wear at, 204, 205
Fused-porcelain restorations, 474, 475f
Fusobacterium species, 73f, 74t
Future demand for operative dentistry, 8-9
factors affecting, 4-8

G
Ga. See Gallium (Ga) alloys.
Gallium (Ga) alloys, 149,654
American Dental Association on, 168
Galvanic corrosion
in amalgam alloy reactions, 154-155, 155t
local, 144
Gamma phases of alloy, 153
Gamma-two reaction product crystals, 153
Gap formation, 479
as contraindication for composite use, 482
significance of, 499
Garnet, 339, 339t
Gas, hazardous, 228
Gastroesophageal reflux, 411
Gel, polymerization and, 202, 203
Gel etchants
before sealant use, 541
composite restoration, 492, 493
class III, 514, 515f
Gemination, 412
Geriatric patients. See Aging.
German measles, 393, 396
Ghon complexes, 398
Gies report, 2
Gingiva, 36
antiepileptic agents and, 399
attached, 37
bleeding from, operating field and,
444-445
health of, 66f
notched lesion and, 532
perforation of, pin-retained restoration
and, 785
sulcular fluid and, 88
Gingival bevel, cast metal restorations and
inlay, 812-815
onlay, 829
Gingival crevice
in tooth habitats for pathogenic plaques,
85
retraction cord in, 468
Gingival embrasure, 34
preoperative wedging in
amalgam restorations and, 658
composite restorations and, 551, 556
removal of compound from, before
matrix removal, 729
Gingival floor extension in initial tooth
preparation, 291, 717f, 827f
for class II amalgam restoration, 704-705
Gingival groove, free, 37
Gingival margin
amalgam restorations and
class II
restorative technique in, 721-723,
732-733
tooth preparation for, 706-708
class III, 750
class V, 744
complex, 790-791
radiograph showing bonding adhesive in, 690
cast metal inlays and, 806-807, 813f
abutment teeth or root-surface lesions
in, 817, 819f
class II, 806-807
composite restorations and, class V, 533
gold restorations and
class III, 889
class V, 883, 884, 887f

I ndex

Gingival margin-cont'd
impression technique and, 843-845
in final tooth preparation, 300
trimmers for, 311, 313f, 315
sharpening of, 320
Gingival papilla, 36f, 37
Gingival portion of facial and lingual surfaces in initial tooth preparation,
289
Gingival recession
caries diagnosis and, 107
class V composite restorations and, 528,
530
clinical examination of, 416
plaque formation and, 84
root caries and, 92
Gingival sulcus, 36f, 37
plaque and, 85
widening of, impression technique and,
843-845
Gingival undercuts in class IV tooth preparation, 524
Gingival-to-occlusal divergence in cast
metal restorations, 804
Gingivitis
HIV infection and, 357
tuberculosis and, 398
Gingivoaxial line angle
amalgam restoration
class 11, 704
class V, 756-757, 758
composite restoration, class III, modified, 513
gold restoration, class V, 884
mechanical undercuts at, pontic and,
639
Gingivostomatitis, primary herpetic, 392,
Plate 9-1
Glass, composites with, 192, 573. See also
Glass ionomers.
Glass ceramics
hot pressed, 575-578
in machined restorations, 222, 223t
Glass inserts, 197
Glass ionomers, 207-211, 208b, 209t, 478,
478t
cements for, 217-219, 218t
cast metal inlay and, 808, 811
zinc oxide-eugenol, resin-modified.
See Zinc oxide-eugenol (ZOE)
cement, resin-modified.
changes in evolution of, 208b
clinical considerations for, 210-211
composition, structure, and properties
of, 176t, 209t, 210
conventional, 478, 478t
for class III restorations, 535-536
for class IV restorations, 535-536
for class V restorations, 535-536
historical development of, 208b, 208-210
hybrid, 209
terminology of, 191
thermal expansion in, 138t
in complex restorations, 769
in liners, 101, 128,171f, 174,175t
for final tooth preparation, 295-296
in pulpal protection in final tooth preparation, 296, 297
in sandwich technique for composite
restorations, 304

Glass ionomers-cont'd
light-curing of
cast metal inlay and, 808-809, 811
class I amalgam restorations and, 679
resin-modified ionomers and, 535-536
resin-modified (IRM;RMGI), 175t, 209,
209t, 478, 478t
composition, structure, and properties
of, 209t
history of use of, 174
in operative treatment of caries, 129,
130f
light-curing of, 535-536. See also
Compomers.
class I amalgam restorations and,
679, 688, 689f
liners of, 101, 128
final tooth preparation and, 295-296
pulpal protection and, 175
schematic example of use of, 171f
shear strengths and, 181t
terminology of, 191
zinc oxide-eugenol. See Zinc
oxide-eugenol (ZOE) cement,
resin-modified.
shear strengths and, 181t
terminology and classification of, 191,
207-208
variety of compositions for, 208b
Glass-polyalkenoate cements, 247
Glenoid fossa, 45, 47f
Gliding tooth contacts, 38
Gloves, 353f, 362
for cleaning equipment, 366
for cleaning instruments, 370
herpes simplex virus and, 393
latex, 362
regulations for, 362
technique for, 365
tuberculosis and, 398
Glucosyltransferase
fluoride ion and, 110
secondary succession and, 77
Gluma 2,186
Gluma Comfort Bond, 247t
Gluma Desensitizer, 493-494
amalgam restorations and, 667
effect of, 258
pulpal protection in final tooth preparation and, 297
Gluma One Bond, 247
Gluma original system, 245
Glutaraldehyde
in class I composite restoration etching,
548
in Gluma Desensitizer, 258
in smear layer treatment, 245
precautions for, 376
uses of, 366, 376
Glycophosphoric acid dimethacrylate
(GPDM), 244
Glycoprotein antigens, category designation four (CD4), 356
Glycoproteins, plaque communities and,
77t
Gnarled enamel, 19
cast metal inlay and, 816
final tooth preparation and, 19, 299
Goggles, 363. See also Protective eyewear.
Gold (Au), 873

Gold alloys, 211-212, 215, 215t, 801, 873-874.
See also Gold restorations.
classification of, 215
cohesion of, 874
compaction in
principles of, 874-876, 877f
technique for, 877
corrosion of, 144, 215, 216-217
degassing of, 874, 875f
E-Z gold as. See E-Z gold.
hardness values for, 339t
in anterior cervical restorations, 474f
manipulation principles for, 873-877
manufacture of, 873-874
properties of, 215, 215t, 216t
retention form and, 293
structure of, 137
thermal expansion in, 138t
Gold finishing knife
for class III gold restorations, 897
for composite restorations, 522, 562
sharpening of, 320f, 321
Gold foil, 211, 212, 873
books of, 874
compaction of, 876-877
degassing of, 874, 875f
in final tooth preparation for smoothness
or roughness, 301
manufacture of, 873
noncohesive, 874
restorations with
class 1, 879-880
class 111, 889, 896f, 897
class V, 886, 888f
thermal expansion in, 138t
uses of, 878
Gold foil box, 873
Gold pellets, 211, 873, 878
restorations with
class 111, 896f, 897
class V, 886-888
Gold restorations, 871-899. See also Gold
alloys.
contraindications to, 878
indications for, 878
instrumentation for
class I, 879
class 111, 892, 893f, 894f, 895f
separation of teeth and, 891, 892f
class V, 884-885, 885f-886f, 887f
materials for. See Gold alloys.
restorative procedure in
class I, 879-880, 881f
class III, 892-898
class V, 886-888, 889f
operating field for, 880-882
tooth preparation for
class I, 878-879
class III, 889-891
modifications of, 891, 892f
class V, 882-884, 887f
principles of, 877-878
Gold substitute alloys, 215, 216
Golden proportion concept, 596
Gonorrhea, 394t-395t, 398
Government agencies, 224, 224b
Government Printing Office, 351
GPDM. See Glycophosphoric acid
dimethacrylate (GPDM).
Grains of metal alloy, 135

I ndex

Granuloma, dental, 413, 414f
Green stone, 685, 686f
Grinding
composite placement and, 192
for surface roughness, 179
Groove extensions, 298
cast metal restorations and
inlay, 817, 818f, 820f
onlay, 829-837, 830f, 834f
Grooves, 276-277
developmental, 16, 38
in caries formation, 21f, 274, 407
occlusofacial, 16
retention of. See Retention grooves or
coves.
Guards, 316
Gum, xylitol, 121
Gummas, 399
Gypsum, hardness test of, 143t
H
Habitats of plaque, 72-75, 74t
structure of, 78
Habitual occlusion, 38
Hair protection, 363
Hairy leukoplakia, 397
Halo around enamel margin, 497
Halogens, 113t
Hand instruments
Black's nomenclature and classification
of, 309
cutting. See Cutting instruments, hand.
double-ended, 310, 311f, 312
for inserting self-cured or light-cured
composites, 495-496
in class II restorations, 560-561
in class III restorations, 517, 518-519
in class IV restorations, 527
in class V gold restorations, 887f
in final tooth preparation for smoothness
or roughness, 301
in removing composite excess and opening embrasure areas, 523
sterilization of, 309-310, 322
Hand mallet for direct gold, 874-875
Hand wrench for Thread Mate System
pins, 778, 780-781
Handles
hand cutting instrument
design of, 310
double-ended, 310
in condenser for direct gold, 876
Handpiece, 322-324, 323t
air-turbine, 323, 323t, 324f, 325f
angle
development of, 322
fraction-grip, 329-330
Borden Airotor, 324f
contamination by and through, 376
contra-angled, internal turbine drives
and, 323, 323t, 324f
fraction-grip angle, 329-330
high-speed, 127,128
development of, 3
infection control and, 368, 376-378
sterilization in, 372, 378-379
injury precautions for, 364
latch-type angle, 780, 781f
shank of, 329-330
noise levels of, 343

Handpiece-cont'd
Page-Chayes, 323f, 323t
sharpening stones for, 318
slow-speed, 128
straight
development of, 322
shank of, 329-330
turbine principle and, 324
Hand-to-surface contamination, 348-349.
See also infection control.
Handwashing
in final OSHA Rule on Bloodborne
Pathogens, 352, 353f
instructions for, 353f, 362-363
Hard palate, 36
Hardening treatment for hand cutting
instruments, 309
Hardness
of cast metal restorations, 217
of dental materials, 142, 143t
of enamel, 17,143t, 339t
Harvard University, first dental program
of, 2
Hatchet
applications for, 314
bibeveled, 311, 312f
class III composite restorations and, 509
class III gold restorations and, 892, 894f
enamel, 313f, 315
class II amalgam tooth preparation
and, 701-702
class II cast metal inlays and, 808
sharpening of, 320
HAV See Hepatitis A virus (HAV).
HAVRIX vaccine, 360
Hazard
of mercury use, 158-165
with cutting instruments and equipment, 342-344
Hazard communications, 226
annual employee training and, 226-227
Hazardous chemicals, 226
Hazardous gases, 228
HB. See Hepatitis B (HB).
Hb e antigen. See Hepatitis B e antigen
(Hb e antigen).
HbsAg. See Hepatitis B surface antigen
(HbsAg).
Health
complex amalgam restorations and, 766
in caries prevention, 110
Health care expenditures, 5
Health care facilities
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration regulations for,
350
Public Health Service guidelines for, 350
Heart rate and rhythm, 435-436
Heat
frictional, 340
in pulpal injury, 340
Heat flow through materials, 138
Heat test, 415
Heat treatment for hand cutting instruments, 309
Heavy metals, toxic, 165-168
Helium-neon (HeNe) lasers, 327,327t
Helper lymphocytes, 356
2-HEMA. See 2-Hydroxyethyl methaerylate
(2-HEMA).

Hemodent, 486
in class V amalgam restoration procedure, 754, 755
retraction cord with, 468
Hemostasis
gingival bleeding in operating field and,
444-445
Hemodent in. See Hemodent.
local anesthesia and, 436
HeNe lasers. See Helium-neon (HeNe)
lasers.
Hepatitis, 394t-395t
data related to control of, 360
defined, 358
epidemiology of, 349-350, 358-361
history of, 396
immunization against, 360
infection risks for personnel from, 349,
359-360
serologic tests for, 360
symptoms and clinical findings in, 359
transmission of, 359
Hepatitis A virus (HAV), 359, 360
vaccine for, 350, 360, 396
Hepatitis B antibody, 360-361
Hepatitis B e antigen (Hb e antigen), 360
Hepatitis B (HB), 394t-395t
data related to control of, 360
epidemiology of, 349-350, 358-361
history of, 396
immunization against, 360
infection risks for personnel from,
349-350,359-360
personnel vulnerability to, 349
serologic tests for, 360
transmission of, 359
vaccine for, 350, 360, 396
Hepatitis B surface antigen (HbsAg), 360-361
Hepatitis C
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report on, 359
history and, 396
immunization against, 360
infection risks for personnel from, 349,
359-360
serologic tests for, 360
symptoms and clinical findings in, 359
transmission of, 359
Hepatitis D, 359
Hepatitis E, 359
Herpes labialis, 392
Herpes simplex virus (HSV), 394t-395t
epidemiology of, 361
history of, 392-393, Plate 9-1
Herpes stomatitis, 357, 392
Herpetic gingivostomatitis, primary, 392,
Plate 9-1
Herpetic lesions, secondary, 392
Herpetic whitlow, 392-393, Plate 9-1
Heterogeneous composites, 195
Heterogeneous microfills, 195
HE See Hydrofluoric acid (HF).
Hg. See Mercury (Hg).
High-copper amalgam alloys, 149,149t,
154,654
corrosion and, 156-157, 157t, 761
mechanical properties of, 155t, 158
restorations and
class 1, 682
complex, 791

I ndex

High-gold alloys, 215, 215t, 801
High-intensity light-curing, 201
High-level disinfectants in sterilization, 376
High-risk patients. See Risk.
High-speed handpiece, 127,128
development of, 3
steam sterilization of, 378-379
High-speed radiographic film, 105
High-speed range of rotary instrument,
324-325
High-temperature dry heat ovens, 373-374
High-volume evacuators (FIVE), 466-467,
468f
spatter and aerosol control and, 378
Hinge axis, 47f, 48
Hinge closure, terminal, 54
Hinge-axis closure, 48
Histology of teeth and investing tissues,
13-37. See also Teeth.
History
of amalgam use, 653
of mercury use, 158-159
of operative dentistry, 2
of restoration composites, 191-194
patient
caries assessment and, 102, 103t
communicable disease, 392-400,
394t-395t
drug sensitivity, 399
HIV. See Human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV).
HIV provirus DNA fragments, 356
Hoes
applications for, 314
sharpening of, 320
Holder for rubber dam isolation, 446
Holding cusps, 38, 42, 43f, 44f
Hollenback carver, 723-725, 732, 733
Home care level, 417
Homogeneous microfills, 195
for machined restorations, 224
Horizontal, terminology and, 281, 766
Horizontal condylar guidance setting,
articulators and, 55-58
Horizontal overlap, 40, 411
occlusion and, 418
Horizontal view of mandibular motion,
52f, 54, 59f
Hot pressed glass ceramics, 575-578
fabrication steps for, 577-578
Housekeeping
requirements for, final OSHA Rule on
Bloodborne Pathogens and, 353
term of, 352
Ho:YAG lasers, 327,327t
HSV See Herpes simplex virus (HSV).
Hue, 139
Huggins, Hal, 159
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). See
also Acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (AIDS).
data of infection control in, 358
epidemiology and transmission of, 356
history of, 394t-395t, 396-397
OSHA-required training on, 356
periodontal disease history associated
with, 397-398, Plate 9-1
progression of, into AIDS, 356-357
risks of
clinical personnel, 349, 350, 357-358
dental patient, 358

Human immunodeficiency virus-cont'd
serology of, 357
symptoms and oral manifestations of,
357
Human papillomavirus, 393, 394t-395t
Hunter-Schreger bands, 19
FIVE. See High-volume evacuators (FIVE).
Hyaluronidase,88
Hybrid composites, 477. See also Composite; Glass ionomers, hybrid.
in machined restorations, 224
properties of, 202t
Hybrid layer, 29
dentin bonding and, 241t, 245, 246f,
250-251,252f
extensive class I amalgam restorations
and, 688-689
fourth-generation adhesives in, 245
Hybridization, 250
Hybridized dentin, contraction gap and,
503, 514f
Hydration in final tooth preparation, 302
Hydraulic liquid process, 220
Hydrochlorothiazide,89t
Hydrodynamic theory of pain transmission, 27
in root-surface sensitivity, 425
Hydrofluoric acid (HF)
all-porcelain pontics and, 649
ceramic restorations and, 259
class I and II indirect restorations and,
584
repair of, 589
veneers and
etched composite, 621f
etched porcelain, 624f
repair of, 630-631
Hydrogen peroxide
in-office vital bleaching technique and,
610
sodium perborate with, cervical resorption and, 608, 609
splinting for avulsed teeth and, 635
tooth sensitivity and, 610
Hydrolysis theory of wear, 205
Hydrophilicity, 140
dentin bonding agent, 180
of monomers, 182
Hydrophobicity, 140
Hydroxyapatite
dentin adhesives and, 245
enamel and, 17,92
remineralization in, 90
2-Hydroxyethyl methacrylate (2-HEMA),
182, 244, 244t
in class I composite restoration etching,
548
in fourth-generation dentin adhesives,
245
in Gluma Desensitizer, 258
in smear layer treatment, 245
Hyperemia
dental pulp, 31
examination and diagnosis of, 415
Hypersensitivity. See Sensitivity.
Hypertension, 399. See also Blood pressure.
Hypnosis, 444
Hypocalcified enamel, 93
clinical examination of, 411, 414f
indirect etched porcelain veneers for,
626f

Hypochlorite disinfection, 367
for incoming items to dental laboratory,
382
for water system contamination, 378
waste disposal and, 364
Hypoplasia, enamel, nonhereditary, 593f.
See also Hypocalcified enamel.
direct full veneers for, 279, 618-620
indirect etched porcelain veneers for,
624,625f

IC. See Infection control (IC).

Idiopathic developmental discolored spots,
613
Idiopathic erosion, 411, 412f
IgA. See Immunoglobulin A (IgA).
IgG. See Immunoglobulin G (IgG).
Illumination in esthetic dentistry, 594
Illusions
of shape, 594, 595f
of translucency, 598-599
Imbrication lines of Pickerill, 20
Immunizations, 112, 360, 361
Immunocompromised patients, 392, 393
Immunoglobulin A (IgA), 77,77t, 112
I mmunoglobulin G (IgG), 77, 77t
I mmunoglobulins, 360
Immunologic system, 77, 77t, 110
Impression compound
in class IV modified tooth preparation,
525-526
in rubber dam isolation, 485
Impression plaster, classification of, 213,
213t
Impression trays, sterilization and, 372
Impressions. See also Bite registration.
all-porcelain pontic, 648
cast metal restoration
final, 843-846, 847f
preoperative, 802, 803f
classification of, 213, 213t
development of new materials for, 4
direct temporary restoration, 841-843
elastic intraoral, 142
indirect restoration, 212-214, 213t
class I and II tooth-colored, 575, 576f,
581
indirect veneer
etched porcelain, 624
processed composite, 622
infection control for, 379-382
night-guard, vital bleaching and, 610
on-site laboratory handling of, 382
optical, CAD/CAM restorations and,
578
polyvinyl siloxane. See Polyvinyl siloxane impression material.
porcelain fused-to-metal resin-bonded
bridges and, 643
prevention of dislodgment of, 174
rate of removal of, plastic deformation
and, 214
transporting, infection control and,
379-382
In vitro studies of dentin adhesion, 256-257
In-Ceram, 259
thermal expansion in, 138t
Inceram Alumina, 223t
Incident plan, 354-355
Incident reports, 227

I ndex

Incipient caries, 90, 406f, 414f
clinical examination for, 408
defined, 93
early detection of, 103
microabrasion in, 613
time for progression of, to cavitation, 92
treatment planning for restorations of,
424
white spots of. See White spots.
Incisal angle, 283
feminine smile and, 594
Incisal edges in esthetics, 599-601
Incisal embrasure, 34f
esthetics and, 599-600, 601
Incisal lapping preparation for veneer,
616-617, 622, 628f
in etched porcelain veneers, 626-627
in indirect processed composite veneers,
622,628f
Incisal margin in class III restorations, 289,
747
Incisal retentive undercuts in class IV tooth
preparation, 524
Incisal surfaces of anterior teeth
beveled conventional class IV tooth
preparation for, 524
class IV amalgam restoration and, 744
Incisoaxial line angle
in class V amalgam restoration, 756-757
mechanical undercuts at, denture tooth
pontic and, 639
Incisor, 15
congenitally missing lateral, 648
crown of, natural tooth pontic and, 636
ground section of, 24f
ideal width-to-length ratio of, 596
maxillary. See Maxillary incisor.
mesioincisal angle fracture on, 524f
peg lateral, ceramic restoration bonding
for, 237f
root resorption on, 32f
rubber dam isolation for, 450
Incisor overlap, 40, 41f
Incisor point, 48, 51f
chewing movement at, 54
Incomplete fracture of tooth, 278, 417f
exposing vital pulp, 421
in pain evaluation, 418-421
Incremental striae of Retzius, 16f, 19-20
Indiloy
composition and classification of, 149t
mechanical properties of, 157t
Indirect pulp cap, 100, 128, 130
Indirect restorations
dentin adhesion in, 259-261, 812f
foundations under, extensive class II
composite preparation for, 563-567
fused porcelain in, 474, 475f
tooth-colored, classes 1 and II, 569-590.
See also Inlay; Onlay.
advantages of, 571-572
ceramic inlays and onlays in, 574-579,
575t
clinical procedures for, 579-589, 587t
CAD/CAM, 582,583f, 587,588f
cementation in, 583-584, 585f
finishing and polishing, 584-587,
587t, 588f
impression in, 581
problems and solutions in, 587
repair in, 588-589

Indirect restorations-cont'd
tooth-colored, classes I and II-cont'd
clinical procedures for-cont'd
temporary restoration in, 582
tooth preparation in, 579-581
try-in and, 583-584, 585f
contraindications to, 571, 572f
difficult intraoral polishing of, 573
disadvantages of, 572-573
indications for, 571
introduction to, 571-573, 574f, 575f, 575t
laboratory-processed composite inlays
and onlays in, 573, 574f, 575t
materials and techniques for, 572
repair potential for, 573
short clinical tract record of, 573
Indirect restorative dentistry, defined, 148.
See also Indirect restorations.
Indirect rests, 316
Indium alloys, 149, 654
Infection
dentinal. See Dentin, infected.
effect of, on dentistry, 347-350
exposed pulp tissue and, 255-256
Infection control (IC), 345-385
as standard of care by dentists, 350
aseptic techniques in, 364-371
cleaning instruments before sterilization and, 369t, 369-371
operatory asepsis and, 365-369
dental control unit water systems and,
376-378
epidemiology and, 361
viral hepatitis, 358-361
federal and state regulations to reduce
exposure risks in, 350-356
for impressions and related registrations,
379-382
handpiece in, 376-378
sterilization of, 378-379
in patient assessment, 389
OSHA-required training on bloodborne
pathogens in,356-358
personnel and, 349, 355-356
assessment protocol for, 361-364
risks of, 347-350
sterilization in, 371-376
boiling water, 374
chemical vapor pressure, 373
dry heat, 373-374
ethylene oxide, 374
handpiece, 378-379
liquid sterilants and high-level
disinfectants in, 376
monitors of, 374-376
new methods of, 374
rotary equipment, 378-379
steam pressure, 372-373
types of instruments and methods of,
376
universal measures for, 402
Infection control program, 350
Infectious mononucleosis, 394t-395t
epidemiology of, 361. See also EpsteinBarr virus (EBV).
history of, 396
Infiltration anesthesia, 437
Inflammation
clinical examination of, 417
in dental pulp, 31
in periodontal ligament, 418

Influenza viruses, 393, 394t-395t
immunization against, 361
Infrared wavelengths, 325, 325f, 327
Inhalation of aerosols or vapors, 343-344
Inhalation sedation in pain control, 443-444
Initial routine visit, 389
Initial tooth preparation. See Tooth preparation, initial.
Injections, 441-443
Injury
from noise, 343
precautions to avoid exposure to, 364
Inlay
cast metal, 803-826, 827f. See also Cast
metal restorations, inlay.
ceramic, in class I and II lesions, 574-579,
575t
defined, 579
laboratory-processed composite, in
class I and II lesions, 573, 574f,
575t
porcelain, 474, 475f
removing cast of, before cementation,
866
repair of tooth-colored, 588-589
Inlay wax, rubbing, 718
Inner layer in tooth preparation, 277-278,
279f
In-office bleaching technique
nonvital, 608-609
vital, 610
Inserts, 197
Inspection. See also Finishing.
in clinical examination for caries,
406-409
of final tooth preparation, 301-303
in class I amalgam restoration, 677,
679
of occlusal surface, 407
Instrument containers, 370, 371
Instruments and equipment, 307-344. See
also specific instrument.
cleaning of, 369t, 369-371
containers for, 370, 371
cutting mechanisms in, 340-342. See also
Cutting instruments.
disinfectant holding solution for, 370
do's and don'ts of recycling of, 369t
exchange of, in operative dentistry, 434
for contouring, 497, 521f, 550f, 562f. See
also Contouring.
for finishing and polishing. See Finishing; Polishing.
hand. See Hand instruments.
mercury management and, 162
safety for, 227, 342-344
step-by-step preparation of, 367-368,
369f
sterilization of. See Sterilization.
Insulation of dental pulp, thermal, 173
Insurance, dental, 5
Intensity of noise, 343
Interarch relationships in occlusion
anterior-posterior, 39f, 40
tooth, 40-42
Intercuspal contact, 38
Interdental papilla, 36f, 37
molar contact area and, 34
Interdisciplinary considerations in treatment planning, 422-423
Interest groups, 224, 224b

I ndex

Interface
adhesive, 140, 177, 178f
strength of, 180
biomechanics of, 145
delayed marginal leakage at, 258-259
in amalgam restorations, 410, 411f
staining at, 206
stress at
resin-dentin, 243-244
tooth-restoration, 203
a-Interferon, 396
Interim prosthesis, denture tooth pontic
bridge for, 638
Interim restoration. See also Temporary
restorations.
all-porcelain pontics in, 647
complex amalgam restorations and,
765-766, 769
Internal line angles, primary resistance
form and, 290, 291
Internal resorption, 413
Internal stress reduction, restorations for,
480,766
Internal wall of tooth preparation, 279
International Standards Organization
(ISO), 224b, 225-226
bur classification and, 331, 334
International Standards Organization
Technical Committee (ISO TC),
224b
Interocclusal record for cast metal restorations, 837, 838f, 839f. See also
Occlusion.
final impressions and, 851-852
Interpin distance, 774-775
Interproximal surfaces of teeth
amalgam corrosion in, 154f
caries progression on, 86f
Intertubular dentin, 23
bonding and, 182, 240
remineralization of, 97
Intracoronal metal restorations, retention
form and, 293
Intracoronal tooth preparation, 279f, 281
Intraoral video camera images, 221
Intrinsic discoloration, 606-608
Inverted cone instruments, 331, 332t
class I amalgam restorations and, 673
composite restorations and, direct
box-only tooth preparation in, 491,
544-545
class 1, 544-547, 548f
class II, 557
extensive, 564
Inverted pen grasp, 315, 316f
Investing in cast metal restorations, 856
Iodine
caries prevention and, 113t
in disinfection,367
for water system contamination, 378
Ionomers, glass. See Glass ionomers.
resin-modified, zinc oxide-eugenol
cement with. See Zinc
oxide-eugenol (ZOE) cement,
resin-modified.
IPS Empress, 627, 629f
mechanical properties of, 575t
Iridium in gold casting alloys, 215
IRM. See Glass ionomers, resin-modified
(IRM; RMGI).
Iron-chromium (Fe-Cr), 215

Irreversible hydrocolloid impression
material
classification of, 213, 213t
handling and transporting, 381-382
Irreversible pulpitis, 31, 97
in examination and diagnosis of teeth
and restorations, 415
Irritation, dentinal response to, 99
ISO. See International Standards Organization (ISO).
ISO TC. See International Standards
Organization Technical Committee (ISO TC).
Isolation
amalgam restorations and, 656
and protection of caries site in operative
treatment, 127, 128f
cotton roll, 465-466
fixed bridge, 461, 462f
of operating field, 444-469, 448t. See also
Operating field.
for composite restorations, 482,
485-486, 487f
in extensive class II restorations, 563
in amalgam restorations, 658
poor, 497
of pit and fissure area, and success of
sealant for caries prevention, 541
rubber dam, composite restorations and,
485,486f
sealants and, 187
Isoniazid,395t
Isotretinoin, 89t
Itaconic acid, 208
J
Jaw
retainer, recontouring of, 448, 449f
temporomandibular joints and, 45, 47f,
49f
working and nonworking side of, 60, 61
Junction of enamel walls in final tooth
preparation, 300
K
Kanamycin, 113t
Kaposi's sarcoma, 357, 397, Plate 9-1
Ketac-Cem, 176t. See also Glass ionomers.
Kissing disease, 396
Knife-edge rubber polishing wheel, 858
Knives, 314f, 315
amalgam. See Amalgam knife.
gold finishing. See Gold finishing knife.
sharpening of, 320f, 321
Knoop hardness test, 142
Kodex drill, 775, 776f
Koplik spots, 393
Krejci wear simulator, 206
L
Labeling for transporting impression material, 380
Laboratory, transporting impressions and
registrations to, 379-382
Laboratory-processed composite inlays
and onlays in class I and II
lesions, 571, 573
fabrication steps in, 573, 574f, 575t
in allowing more efficient use of dentist's time, 572
indications for, 573

Lactobacilli
caries and, 67
ecologic phenomena and, 74-75
plaque community and, 74t, 91
Lactoferrin, 77t
Lactoperoxidase, 77t
Lamellae, enamel, 19, 20f
Lamina limitans, 240
Lamina propria, 35-36
Land sliding, 760
Laser curing, 198, 480
Laser instruments, 325t, 325-327, 327t
Laser types by source and wavelength,
325t
Latch-type angle handpiece shank, 329-330
Lateral movement of mandible, 47f, 48,50
articulators and, 55-58
frontal view of, 54-55
Lateral shift, 50
Laterotrusion mandibular pathways, 50
Latex allergy, 362
rubber dam isolation and, 446
Latex gloves, 362
allergy to, 362
in handling instruments during cleaning, 370
Lathe-cut particles of amalgam alloy, 150,
654
insertion of, 665
Laundering in infection control, 364
Laxity in temporomandibular joint, 50
articulators and, 58
LC systems. See Light-curing (LC)
systems.
LCTE. See Linear coefficient of thermal
expansion (LCTE).
Lead, waste management of, 165-168
Leakage. See also Microleakage.
marginal, delayed interfacial, 258-259
sealants and, 190
LED curing units. See Light-emitting diode
(LED) curing units.
Left-handed operator, 431-432
Legionella, 377
Leinfelder wear tester, 205
Length of tooth, apparent, 594, 595f
Lentulo spiral instrument, 783, 784f
Leukoplakia, hairy, 397
Li. See Lithium (Li).
Lidocaine, 435, 435t
as topical anesthetic, 441
central nervous system depression with,
436
duration of action of, 435b
with epinephrine, 434-435, 435b, 435t
Life expectancy, 5, 8
Lifespan. See Longevity, clinical.
Ligaments, periodontal, 37
Ligatures in rubber dam removal, 463
Light
in esthetic dentistry, 594, 597, 598
intensity of, polymerization zone and,
200
penetration problems of, 201
translucency and, 598-599
"Light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation," 325. See also
Laser curing.
Light scattering of light-curing units, 200
Light-cured materials
all-porcelain pontics and, 649

I ndex

Light-cured materials-cont'd
amalgam restorations and, 655
bonding to dentin in, 259
class I, 679
composite restorations and
direct
class I, 549
class 11, 559f, 560
class III, 517, 520-521
class V, 533-534
indirect, class I and II, 584, 585f-586f
variables in,198-202
facial insertion of, 520
glass-ionomer cements for. See Glass
ionomers.
high-intensity, 201
in full veneers, 619, 620f
insertion of, 495-496
natural tooth pontic and, 637-638
polymerization of, 480
splints and
attaching fixed wire, 634
avulsed teeth with, 635
time for, 201
wear resistance and, 201
Light-curing (LC) systems, 197, 198, 202
cleaning of mirror on, 198
monitoring of, 199
Light-emitting diode (LED) curing units,
198,202
Light-focusing tips, 200-201
Lighting in color selection, 484
Light-transmitting wedges, 200
Limiting factor, bacteria and, 78
Line angles. see Angles.
Linear coefficient of thermal expansion
(LCTE), 137, 138t, 479
of acrylic resin, 476
of amalgam, 654
of gold, 212
tooth structure expanding and contracting and, 203
Liners and bases, 170-177, 174t, 175t, 176t.
See also Cement.
amalgam restorations and
dentin bonding in, 259
extensive class I, 687, 688, 689f
clinical considerations for, 174-177
composite restorations and, 499
flowable materials in, sandwich technique for, 304
development of new, 4
objectives for, 171-174, 186
final tooth preparation and, 295-298
remaining dentin thickness and, 174-177
survival of, 177
terminology and classification for, 170-171
Lingual access
amalgam restorations and, class III,
745-751,752f
composite restorations and
class III, 504, 506, 507-510, 511, 512
class IV, 526-527
Lingual convexity, tooth contours and, 32
Lingual crossbite, 40-42
Lingual cusp preparation, inlay
cast metal, 819-822
capping in, 822-824, 825f
maxillary first premolar, 580f
Lingual embrasure in class II amalgam
restorations, 730

Lingual proximal extension in conventional class II tooth preparation,
551,552
Lingual surfaces, 87f
cast metal restoration modifications and
inlay, 824-826, 827f
onlay, 829-831
contouring and polishing composite on,
522
gingival portion of
initial tooth preparation and, 289
treatment planning and, 425
molar, restorations on occlusal two
thirds of, 281
of anterior teeth in class I amalgam
restorations, 672
of maxillary incisors, 281, 282f, 510-512
Lining mucosa, 36
Lip
cutting instrument injury to, 342-343
reflective mucosa of, 36
Lipases, 77t
Liquid etchants. See also Acid-etching.
before sealant use, 541
for composite restorations, 492-493
Liquid sterilants, 376
Liquid wastes, responsibilities for, 228
Lithium (Li), 192
Load per tooth in restorations, 146
Load/ deformation curve, 142f
Loading, 140-141
cement displacement and, 220
occlusal, of class I amalgam restoration,
142f
Local anesthesia, 434-443, 435b, 435t. See
also Anesthesia.
Local galvanic corrosion, 144
Longevity, clinical, 168, 169t
amalgams and, 169t
dentin bonding in, 183, 257
esthetic restorations and, 474
machined restoration, 224
Longitudinal terminology, 281
Loose pins in amalgam restorations, 783
Lost-wax method for glass-ceramic restorations, 576
Loudness of noise, 343
Low-copper amalgam, 149, 149t, 653-654
mechanical properties of, 155t
Low-gold alloys, 215, 215t, 801
Low-mercury amalgams, 149
Low-speed range of rotary instrument, 324
Lubricant for rubber dam, 449, 453, 454f
Luting systems, 186-187, 219, 219t
Lymphadenopathy, 398
Lymphocytes, 356, 357
Lymphoma, 357
Lysozyme, 77t
M
Machined restorations, 220t, 220-224, 222b,
223t
Macroabrasion, 613-615
Macrodontia, 412
Macrofillers, 194, 195, 196f
properties of, 202t
Macroprotection, 205
Macroshear strength, 181, 181t, 185
Macrotags, 181, 182f
Macrotests of bond strength, 177-179
Magnification in operative dentistry, 434

Mahler scale for marginal breakdown, 158,
159f
Maintenance phase in treatment planning,
422
Makeup, teeth appearance and, 607
Malalignment of teeth, 75, 597
Malamed's Handbook of Local Anesthesia,
434
Maleic acid
glass ionomers and, 208
in smear layer treatment, 245
Malleable materials, 141
Mallets for direct gold, 874-875
Malpositioned teeth, 75, 597
Mandible
anatomy, histology and physiology of,
35, 47f
movement of, 45-48, 49f
articulators and, 55-58, 59f, 60f
capacity of, 48-55
borders in, 47f, 48-51
frontal view in, 53f, 54-55
horizontal view in, 52f, 54, 59f
limits of, 47f, 48-51
sagittal view in, 51-54
coronal plane of, 45
directions of, 45, 47f
functional pathways in, 50
planes of movement in, 45, 47f
protrusive, identifying and removing
interferences in, 863
rotational, 45, 47f
temporomandibular joints and, 45,
47f, 49f
tooth contacts during, 58-61
types of, 45-48
shifted laterally for improved access and
visibility, 758, 759f
Mandibular arch, position for operating
on, 433
Mandibular canine, class III amalgam
restoration on, 743-744
Mandibular condyle, 45,47f
Mandibular incisors
amalgam restorations on, 751-752, 753. See
also Class III amalgam restorations.
fracture of, light-cured composite
restoration for, 767
gold restorations for, 891, 892f
completed, 898f
resin-bonded bridge combination for,
644-645
resin-bonded natural-tooth pontic for, 638
splinting techniques for, 633-634, 644-645
Mandibular molars
amalgam restorations and
class I, facial pit in, 679, 680f
class 11, 717
pin-retained, 775, 776f, 778, 779f,
788f-789f
arrested caries on mesial surface of, 106f
cast metal restorations and
inlay, 804, 805f
faulty grooves or fissures in, 817, 818f
occlusal margin extension toward
cusp tip in, 822, 823f
onlay, 829-837
fractured mesiolingual cusp in,
829-831
slot preparation in, 835
pit-and-fissure caries in, 82f, 83f

I ndex

Mandibular molars-cont'd
posterior bridge with metal and porcelain pontic for, 645-646
tilted mesially, 836f
Mandibular motion. See Mandible, movement of.
Mandibular posterior bridge
with all metal pontic, 646, 647f
with metal and porcelain pontic,
645-646
Mandibular premolars
amalgam restorations and
class I, occlusal pits and fissures in,
679, 681f
class II
both proximal surfaces in, 690f,
714-717
mesioocclusodistal preparation for,
716
occlusal patterns in, 708-709
one only proximal surface in,
697-713. See also Class II amalgam
restorations, tooth preparation
for.
posterior bridge with metal pontic
for, 646, 647f
rotated teeth in, 7I2
defective mesioocclusodistal, replacement of, 571f
cast metal restorations and
inlay, 804, 805f
mesioocclusal preparation for,
816-817
onlay, 836f
composite restorations and
class I, two separate faulty occlusal
pits in, 548, 549f
conservative, active caries in, 548
gold restorations and, 879-880, 881f
Mandibular teeth
in intercuspation position, 15f
isolation of
cotton roll, 466, 485
rubber dam, 451-452
Manpower, dental, 7
Margin
cast
burnishing in improvement of,
863-865
i mprovement of, 863-866
class I and II indirect restoration try-ins
and, 584
deterioration or discoloration at, 158,
159f
acrylic resin and, 476
delayed interfacial leakage in, 258-259
halo around enamel in, 497
white line around enamel in, 497
integrity of composite restorations at,
207
limited to supragingival locations, 285
outline form, 288, 300
class III direct gold restoration, 889,
890f, 891f
class III restoration, 289
sealing of, corrosion products and, 156f
Marginal cusp ridge, 42, 43f
Marginal gap or ditching, 409-410
fracture and, 158
treatment planning for, 425

Marginal ridge, 42, 43f
amalgam restorations and
adjacent tooth compatibility with, 410
class I, distal, 673-674, 675f
class II, carving of, 732
class III, 745, 746f
complex, matrix in, 790-79I
fractures in, 667
composite restorations and
class I, extensions into, 546, 547f
class II, faulty pit near, 551, 552f
discrepancy of, treatment planning for,
425
inlay cast metal restorations and, 819-822
Marginal voids, amalgam restorations and,
410, 425, 667
Marking of contacts, 862
Maryland bridge, 640, 64I-642
for mandibular incisors, 645
for mandibular molars, 646
for mandibular premolars, 646, 647f
retention of, 2I7
shear strengths in, 181t
Masculine smile, 594, 599
Mask, 363
cleaning instruments and, 370
in inhalant precautions, 344
removal of, 363
tuberculosis and, 398
Mass properties, 138-139
Master die for laboratory-processed ceramic
inlays and onlays, 575, 576f
Master working cast
for hot pressed glass restorations, 577
for laboratory-processed ceramic inlays
and onlays, 575, 576f
Mastication
dentin adhesion and, 257
embrasures and, 35, 35f
major determinants of, 15
neurologic correlates in control of, 61-62
pain during pressure of, 419
primary resistance form and, 290
sensory feedback and, 61
tooth contours in, 32, 33f
vertical dimension and, 16
Masticatory mucosa, 36
Mat gold, 21I, 212
Material categories, 135-137
Material properties, 137-145, 138t, 143t
biologic, 144-145
chemical, 143-144, 145f
mechanical, 140-143,143t, 144f
physical, 137-I40, 138t
Material safety data sheets (MSDs), 226, 227f
Material structure, 137
Matrix. See also Matrix strip.
amalgam restoration, 664-665
class I
conservative, 681
occlusolingual, 694-695
class II, 718-730, 731f
both proximal surfaces involved
in, 715, 721f, 722f, 724f, 725f,
788f-795f
class III, 753
class V, 759-760
complex, 787-791, 792f-793f, 794-795f
removal of, 725-726, 793-795
stability and, 790-791

Matrix-cont'd
Barton, 695
composite restoration
class II, 558-560
large restoration or foundation in,
565
class III, 515-516
class IV, 526-527
composition of, I94
Matrix band
amalgam restoration
class II
carving occlusal portion in, 732
removal in, 732-734
class V, 760
for anchoring posterior tooth, 461-463
quadrant dentistry and, 735, 736f
Matrix materials in molded abrasive
instruments, 339
Matrix monomers, I97
Matrix phase
of composites, 137, 494-495
of spherical amalgam, 152, 153f
Matrix strip. See also Matrix.
amalgam restoration
class II, custom-made, 725
class III, 753
complex, 787
in diastema correction, 602-603
plastic, cementation in class I and II
indirect restorations and, 584,
585f
polyester. See Polyester matrix strip.
Maxilla, anatomy, histology and physiology of, 35, 47f
Maxillary arch, position for operating on,
433
Maxillary bridge
all-metal pontic on, 642-644
splint combination with, 644-645
porcelain fused-to-metal pontic on,
642-644, 646, 647f
splint combination with, 644-645
Maxillary canines
amalgam restoration on
class III, 743-744. See also Class III
amalgam restorations.
distal surface, 743-751, 752f
facial margin, 753
tooth preparation for, 745-751, 752f
pin-retained, 767
gold restoration for, 889-891, 893f
Maxillary incisors
amalgam restorations for, 680f
composite restorations for
class III
insertion in, 518-5I9, 520
tooth preparation for, 510, 511f
class IV, tooth preparation in, 524-525
conservative bridges and, 636-638
diastema correction in, 601-604
fracture fragment in, 238f
gold restorations for, 878f
class III, 889-89I, 898
lingual surface restorations for, 28I, 282f
pontic for, resin-bonded
denture tooth, 638, 639f
natural-tooth, 636-638
splints for, 632-634
avulsed teeth and, 635-636

I ndex

Maxillary molars
amalgam restorations for
class I
lingual pit of, 679, 680f
occlusal pits and fissures of, 679, 681f
class 11, 709-710
both proximal surfaces in, 716, 717
mesioocclusodistal preparation for,
716,717
mesioocclusodistofacial preparation
for, 717
pinhole placement in, 775, 776f, 778,
779f
bridge with porcelain fused-to-metal
pontic for, 646, 647f
cast metal restorations for
caries on distofacial and mesiofacial
cusps in, 825, 827f
inlay, 805f
capping facial cusps in, 824f
modifications in, 817-819, 820f
onlay, 829-837
modifications in, 835-836, 866f, 868f
ceramic inlay for, mesioocclusodistofacial preparation for, 582f
composite restorations for
conventional tooth preparation in, 556
light-cured, insertion in, 494f
sealant applied to, 122f
Maxillary premolars
amalgam restorations for
class I, 672-687. See also Class I amalgam restorations, conservative.
class 11, 710
complex, 765f
mesial surface of, 710
proximal margins of, 710
cast metal restorations for
contour and contact in, wax patterns
and, 853, 854f
inlay
flaring and beveling in, 814
modifications in, esthetics and, 816f,
817
two-surface preparation for, 803, 804f
onlay
mesioocclusal preparation in, 835
mesioocclusodistal preparation for,
833-835
modifications in, esthetics and, 835836, 866f, 868f
composite restorations for
class I, fissure in, 543
class 11, 560, 561f
large or foundation, 564-565, 566f
mesiofacial corner in, 554-557
indirect tooth-colored restorations and,
580f
mandibular posterior bridge with metal
and porcelain pontic for, 646, 647f
Maxillary teeth
anterior
conservative esthetic procedures for,
593f
reshaping natural teeth and, 600
direct full veneers for, 593f, 618-620
in intercuspation position, 15f
isolation of
cotton roll, 465
rubber dam, 450, 451f, 453f

Maximal intercuspation, 38
interocclusalrecord and, 837, 851
Maximal protruded closure, 50
Maximum recommended doses (MRD),
435,435t
10-MDP See 10-Methacryloyloxy decyl
dihydrogenphosphate (10-MDP).
MDR-TB. See Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB).
Measles, 394t-395t
epidemiology of, 361
German
history of, 396
respiratory transmission of, 393
history of, 393-396
respiratory transmission of, 393
vaccine against, 361
Mechanical adhesion or bonding, 179, 180f,
237
of glass ionomers, 210, 211
Mechanical fatigue in copper amalgam
alloys, 158
Mechanical properties, 140-143, 143t, 144f
Mechanical sharpeners, 317-318, 319f
Mechanical techniques for sharpeners, 318,
319f
Medical history form, 389, 390f-391f
Medical review, 389-400, 394t-395t
allergies in, 399
cardiac abnormalities in, 399
changes with aging in, 399-400
communicable diseases in, 392-400,
394t-395t
form for, 389, 390f-391f
medications in, 399
systemic diseases in, 399
Medical waste. See Waste disposal.
Medically compromised patients, 110, 392,
393
Medications
medical review of, 399
pulpal, 170, 173-174, 175t, 176t
schematic of, 171f
salivary flow and, 89t, 110
Mediotrusion mandibular pathways, 50
Megafillers, 194, 195f, 197
Melting range for casting alloys, 216
Mepivacaine, 435b, 435t
with levonordefrin, 435b, 435t
Mercuroscopic expansion of amalgam
alloys, 157
Mercury (Hg)
absorption, transportation, and excretion
of, 162-163
absorption efficiencies for, 160, 160t
collection and disposal of, 667
dental office exposure to, 160-165, 161b
dispensers for, 151
fetal development and, 163-164
filings of amalgam alloy mixed with, 149
half-life of, 162
hazards of, 158-165
history of use of, 158-159
hypersensitivity to, 158
in air, 164
in amalgam alloy, 148-149, 150-151, 152
in food, 164
management of, 151, 158-165, 160t, 161b
amalgam restorations and, 653
Mercury-free direct-filling alloy, 149

Mesh, stainless steel, splints of, 633
Mesial bevel, 313
Mesial cusp ridge, 42, 43f
Mesial fissure in amalgam restoration
enameloplasty, 677
Mesial gingival margin trimmer, 706-708
Mesial surface and proximal margin of
maxillary first premolar, 710
Mesial tooth surface preparation, 279, 281,
282f, 283, 765f
Mesiofacial corner of maxillary first premolar, 554-557
Mesiofacial cusp location, 40
Mesiofacial margin of maxillary first premolar, 710, 836
Mesiofacial wall direction in amalgam
restorations, 702
Mesioincisal angle fracture on central
incisor, 524f
Mesioincisal corner fracture, 524-525
Mesiolingual embrasure caries, 710
Mesiolingual preparation
inlay, maxillary molars and, 581
wall direction in, class 11 amalgam
restorations, 702
Mesioocclusal, distofacial, and distolingual
( MODFL) inlay preparation for
maxillary molar, 581f
Mesioocclusal (MO) finishing and polishing in amalgam restoration, 734f
Mesioocclusal (MO) preparation, 279, 281,
282f
for pin-retained amalgam restorations,
770f
of mandibular premolars
in cast metal restorations, 816-817,
835
in class 11 amalgam restorations,
697-713, 716. See also Class II
amalgam restorations, tooth
preparation for.
of maxillary molars
for amalgam restorations, 709
for cast metal inlays, 817, 820f
of maxillary premolars
for class 11 restorations, 554-557
for inlays, 580f
Mesioocclusodistal and lingual cusp
( MODL) preparation, inlay, 580f
Mesioocclusodistal ceramic CAD/CAM
restorations replacing defective
amalgam, 571f
Mesioocclusodistal (MOD) preparation,
279,283
amalgam restorations and
class 11, 716, 717
complex, 765f
inlays and
mandibular premolar, 824, 831f
maxillary premolar, 580f, 816-817
onlays and
mandibular premolar, 826-829
maxillary premolar, 833-835
Mesioocclusodistofacial (MODF) preparation, 717
for mandibular molar cast metal onlay,
829,830f
maxillary molar
ceramic inlay, 582f
class 11 amalgam, 717

I ndex

4-MET. See 4-Methacryloxyethyl trimellitic
acid (4-MET).
4-META. See 4-Methacryloxyethyl trimellitate anhydride (4-META);
4-Methyloxy ethyl trimellitic
anhydride (4-META).
Metabolic potential, plaque and, 78, 79f
Metal, 135
in cast metal restorations, 214-217,
215t, 216t. See also Cast metal
restorations.
passive, 135-136
Metal alloy
defined, 135
in cast metal restorations, 214-217, 215t,
216t
microstructure of, 135f
Metal matrix, compound-supported, composite restorations and
class II, 558-560
class 11I, 515
class IV, 526-527
Metal pontic
mandibular pontic with, 646, 647f
porcelain and, 640-646, 647f
mandibular bridge with, 645-646
with metal retainer, 640-646, 647f
Metal restorations
cast. See Cast metal restorations.
veneers for, 628-630
faulty, 631-632
Metal retainer. See Retainer.
Metal-ceramic restorations, bonding in,
260-261
Metallic oxide, 135, 136
Metamerism, 139,598
Methacrylic acid in smear layer treatment,
245
2-(Methacryloxy) ethyl phenyl hydrogen
phosphate (Phenyl-P), 244, 244t,
245
4-Methacryloxyethyl trimellitate anhydride
(4-META), 244t
4-Methacryloxyethyl trimellitic acid
(4-MET), 244t
10-Methacryloyloxy decyl dihydrogenphosphate (10-MDP), 244t
Methyl mercury, toxicity of, 160
Methyl methacrylate (MMA), 244t
history of use of, 191
in early sealants, 188
polymerization of, 136
4-Methyloxy ethyl trimellitic anhydride
(4-META), 185, 244t
in resin-bonded bridges, 641-642
veneers for metal restorations and, 630
repair of, 631
Metronidazole, 397
MGC Dicor, 339t
MI. See Maximal intereuspation; Mutans
streptococci.
Micro II, 149t
Microabrasion,612-613
Microbes. See Bacteria.
Microbrushes for etchants, 492, 493f
in class III lesions, 514-515, 517
Micrococcus mucilaginous, 80
Microdontia, 412
Microfill composites, 194, 195, 196, 197f,
477
clinical technique for, 497, 534-535

Microfill composites-cont'd
comparison of properties of, 202t
heterogeneous, 195
homogeneous, 195
wear resistance of, 205
Microfracture
class V composite restoration for,
531-532
dentinal, complex amalgam restorations
for, 766
tooth flexure and, 146, 147f, 148f
Microfracture theory of wear, 205
Microleakage. See also Leakage.
acrylic restorations and, 476
bonding systems for retention form and,
293
complex amalgam restorations and, 766
composite restorations and
class 1I, 556-557
pin-retained, 524, 525f
corrosion products and, 156
dentin adhesion and, 254-255
resin-dentin interface in, 243-244
Micromechanical bonding, 179
for amalgam, 185
retention form and, 293
Micromechanical retention, 179
of sealants, 187
Micron finishing diamonds, 536
Microorganisms. See Bacteria.
Microprotection, 205
Microretention, 179
Microtags, 181, 182f
in dentin bonding systems, 184f
Microtensile test, 256f, 257
Microtests of bond strength, 179
Microwave oven, sterilization and, 374
Midifillers, 194, 195, 196f, 197f
properties of, 202t
Midsagittal plane of mandibular movement, 45
Miliary tuberculosis, 398
Minamata Bay, 164-165
Minamata disease, 165
Minifill, fiber-modified homogeneous, 195
Minihybrids, 196
Minikin pins, 765f, 767f, 772t, 777t, 778-780
drill shanks for, 775
size of, 773
Minim pins, 772t, 777t, 778-780
size of, 773
Minocycline, 606
Minuta pins, 772t, 777t, 778-780
drill shanks for, 775
size of, 773
Miracle mixtures, 208-209
Mirror
in evaluating contour of matrix band,
720, 721f, 725
in retraction, 469
light-curing unit, cleaning of, 198
position of hand to hold, 433
Missed beats, 436
Missing teeth, 5t, 6
Mists and airborne contamination, 348
Mixing of amalgam material, 151, 665
MMA. See Methyl methacrylate (MMA).
MMEP. See Mono (2-methacryloxy) ethyl
phthalate (MMEP).
MO tooth preparation. See Mesioocclusal
(MO) preparation.

Mobile teeth
acid-etched, resin-bonded splints for,
632-636
clinical examination of, 416
MOD preparation. See Mesioocclusodistal
( MOD) preparation.
Modeling compound in securing retainer,
449,455
Modern Tenacin, 176t
MODF tooth preparation. See Mesioocclusodistofacial (MODF) preparation.
MODFL. See Mesioocclusal, distofacial,
and distolingual (MODFL) inlay
preparation for maxillary molar.
Modified composites, 195
Modified feldspathic porcelain, 222, 223t
Modified palm-and-thumb grasp, 316
Modified pen grasp, 315
MODL. See Mesioocclusodistal and lingual
cusp (MODL) preparation, inlay.
Modulay, 216t
Modulus of elasticity, 141, 143
of cast metal restorations, 217
of composites, 479
of dentin, 26
of microfill composites, 477
Mohs hardness scale, 142, 143t
Moist versus dry surfaces in dentin adhesion, 241t, 245-247, 247t-248t,
248b,251-254
Moisture
control of, operating field, 444-445. See
also Rubber dam isolation.
hand instruments and, 309-310
Molar, 15f, 16
after years of use, 16f
cross-section of, 16f
interdental papilla and, 34
lingual cusp reduction of, for capping,
822,823f
mandibular. See Mandibular molars.
maxillary. See Maxillary molars.
restorations for
classes I and II composite, 539, 544,
546
occlusal surface, 281, 282f
occlusal two thirds of facial and lingual surfaces in, 281
pinhole placement in, 774-775
rubber dam isolation for, 450
tilted, onlays and, 836f, 837
vertical dimension and, 16
Molar point, 48, 51f
Molded abrasive rotary cutting instruments, 339
Mon-angle condensers for direct gold in
class III gold restorations, 892,
896f, 897f
Mon-angle shank, 310
Monitors of sterilization, 374-376
Mono (2-methacryloxy) ethyl phthalate
(MMEP), 244t
Monomers, 136
hydrophilic, 182,185f
matrix, 197
Mononucleosis, infectious, 394t-395t
Mouth mirror, hand position for. See
Mirror.
Mouth preparation for trying-in of cast,
858-860

I ndex

Mouth props, 469
MRD. See Maximum recommended doses
(MRD).
MSDs. See Material safety data sheets
(MSDs).
Mucins, plaque and, 77t
Mucogingival junction, 36, 37
Mucosa, oral, 35-36
Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDRTB), 361
Multipurpose bonding systems, 185
Mumps, 361, 396
Munsell color system, 139
Mutans streptococci
caries and, 67
management of, 101
oral hygiene and, 87
plaque in, 73, 74t, 78, 91
prevention of, 113
smooth enamel surfaces and, 83
ecologic phenomena and, 75
fluoride and, 110-111
in pits and fissures, 91
Mycobacterium in biofilms, 377
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 394t-395t, 398
disinfection for, 366-367, 378
in immunocompromised patients, 358
N
Nanofillers, 194-195, 196
Napkin, rubber dam, 448-449, 454
Nasmyth membrane, 21
National Association of Dental Laboratories, 380
National Dental Association (NDA), 224b
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey III. See Third
National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey.
National Institute of Health-National
Institute for Dental Research
( NIH-NIDR), 159
National Institute on Standards and Technology, American Dental Association with, 149
Natural tooth pontic, 636-638
Natural tooth shape, 599-601
NDA. See National Dental Association
(NDA).
Nd:YAG laser. See Neodymium:yttriumaluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser.
Neck strap for Young rubber dam frame,
447f, 455
Necrosis
caseation, 398
dentinal, 99
pulpal, 31
Needles
disposable, 437, 439f-440f
disposal of, 443
multiple injections and, 443
resheathing of, 442
safe disposal of, 364
final OSHA Rule on Bloodborne
Pathogens and, 352-354
withdrawal of, 442
Neisseria species, 394t-395t, 398
plaque and, 73f
Neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-gamet
( Nd:YAG) laser, 326f, 327, 327t
Neurologic correlates in occlusion, 61-62

New true dentalloy, 149t
Newborn, oral flora of, 76
Newtonian behavior, 143, 144f
NHANES III. See Third National Health
and Nutrition Examination
Survey.
Nib
condenser, 875, 876
of hand cutting instrument, 310
Niche, ecological, 75
Nickel for hand cutting instruments, 309
Nickel-chromium (Ni-Cr), 215
Ni-Cr. See Nickel-chromium (Ni-Cr).
Nightguard vital bleaching, 610-612
NIH-NIDR. See National Institute of
Health-National Institute for Dental Research (NIH-NIDR).
9-o'clock position, 431, 432f
Nitrile latex gloves, 362. See also Gloves.
in handling instruments during cleaning, 370
Nitrous oxide, 228
and oxygen in inhalation sedation, 444
5-N-methacryloyl 5-aminosalicylic acid
(5-NMSA), 244t
5-NMSA. See 5-N-methacryloyl
5-aminosalicylic acid (5-NMSA).
No squeeze cloth technique for amalgam
alloy, 150
Noble metal alloys, 215t, 215-216
Nocardia species, 73f
Noise, injury from, 343
Nonbonded amalgam restorations, 654-655
Noncaustic styptic with retraction cord,
468
Noncentric cusps, 38, 42-45, 46f
Noncohesive surface of direct-filling gold,
211,874
Noncritical items in operatory, asepsis and,
366
Noncrystalline ceramics, 136
Noncutting instruments, 310, 683f
Nonflexible rubber matrix in molded abrasive instruments, 339
Nonfunction contacts, marking of, 862
Nonfunction mandibular pathways, 50
Nonhereditary, hypocalcified enamel, 279,
593f, 618f
clinical examination of, 411, 414f
Nonholding cusps, 38,42-45, 46f
Nonreversible caries, 276, 406f
Non-Rinse Conditioner (NRC), 250
Nonsilicate fillers, 196
Nonspecific plaque hypothesis, 68
Nonsupporting cusps, 38
in occlusion, 42-45, 46f
Nonvital bleaching treatments, 608-609
Nonvital teeth, discolorations in, 607
Nonworking contacts
evaluation of, 418
marking of, 862
Nonworking mandibular pathways, 50, 54
Nonworking side of jaw, 60
Notching, class V composite restoration
for, 531-532
NPG. See N-phenylglycine (NPG).
NPG-GMA. See N-phenylglycine glycidyl
methacrylate.
N-phenylglycine (NPG), 244t
N-phenylglycine glycidyl methacrylate,
244,244t

NRC. See Non-Rinse Conditioner (NRC).
NTG-GMA. See N-tolylglycine glycidyl
methacrylate (NTG-GMA).
N-tolylglycine glycidyl methacrylate
(NTG-GMA), 244t
Numerical code for bur head size and
shape, 330-331
Nutrients, plaque formation and, 78, 87-88,
101
Nutritional analyses, 102
Nuva seal, 188t
O
O. See Occlusal (O) tooth surface
preparation.
Objective tests of pain, 418
Oblique cusp ridge, 42
Oblique ridge, 42
OCA wear. See Occlusal contact area
( OCA) wear.
Occluding of casting, 862-863, 863f-864f
Occlusal bevels, 816
Occlusal caries, prevention of, 189
Occlusal contact, 37
all-porcelain pontics and, 649
amalgam restorations and, 656
complex, 766
corrosion of, 154f
preoperative assessment in, 658
problems of, 410
cast metal restorations and, plane correction for, 801
composite restorations and, 482
classes I and II, 539
preoperative assessment in, 486
extensive class II lesions and, 563
patterns of, 38
wear at, 204
Occlusal contact area (OCA) wear, 204
Occlusal convergence of prepared walls,
663f
Occlusal divergence, 804
Occlusal embrasure, 34f
class II amalgam restorations and, 730,
732,733
Occlusal fissure
continuous with facial fissure, 817, 818f
segmented by coalesced enamel, 712
Occlusal grooves in enamel, 20-21
clinical examination of, 21f, 407
continuous with faulty lingual surface
groove, 817, 820f
primary, 21f, 407
Occlusal loading
of class I amalgam restoration, 142f
stress transfer and, 146
tooth flexure and, 146
Occlusal margins, 300. See also Occlusal
outline; Occlusal (O) tooth surface
preparation.
amalgam restorations and, 662f, 714
cast metal inlays and, 815f, 822, 823f
gold restorations and, 882-883
Occlusal outline. See also Occlusal step.
i n class I gold restoration, 882-883
in class II amalgam restorations, 697-699
in mandibular first premolar, 708-709
in class II composite restorations with
conventional preparation, 697-699
Occlusal reduction in cast metal onlay,
826-829

I ndex

Occlusal rest areas of mandibular posterior
bridge with metal and porcelain
pontic, 645-646
Occlusal step. See also Occlusal outline.
amalgam restorations and
class II, 697-699
carving of matrix band in, 732
unusual outline form in, 712
complex, carving of matrix band in,
793,795f
cast metal restorations and
inlay, 804-806, 807f
onlay, 826-828
composite restorations and, class II, conventional preparation in, 551-552
gold restoration, 878-879
Occlusal stress
class V composite restoration for, 531
composites and, 204
Occlusal surfaces
carving of, in amalgam restorations,
665-666
in class II, 732
direct visualization of, 407
extensive wear of, 572f
forces on, heavy, class I and II indirect
restorations contraindicated in,
571, 572f
inspection of, 407
treatment planning and, 540-541
of posterior teeth, and class I amalgam
restorations, 672
of premolars and molars, 281, 282f
pits and fissures of, clinical examination
for, 407, 408, 736f
tooth preparation for, 279, 281, 282f
Occlusal table, 42, 43f
Occlusal (O) tooth surface preparation,
279, 281, 282f, 283. See also
Occlusal margins.
in complex amalgam restorations, 765f
Occlusal trauma, signs of, 417
Occlusal two thirds of facial and lingual
surfaces of molars, restorations
on, 281
Occlusal wax-up, 854-855
Occlusal wear
amalgam restorations and, 656
for posterior composites, 206-207
indirect restorations and
extensive, 572f
laboratory-processed, 572f
Occlusion, 37-62
acquired, 38
amalgam restorations and
class I, 684-685
class II, 733-734
tooth preparation in, 708-709
complex, 765-766
matrix removal and, 793, 794, 795f
preoperative assessment for, 658
anterior-posterior interarch relationships
in, 39f, 40
assessment of, 54, 417-418
cast metal restorations and, 802, 803f, 804
full-arch casts mounted on semiadjustable articulator in, 837, 839f
composite restorations and
class II, 551
class Ill, 523
preoperative assessment for, 486

Occlusion-cont'd
contacts during mandibular movements
and, 58-61
convenience, 38
dynamic relationships in, 37-38, 418
embrasures and, 35
esthetic dentistry and, 599
habitual, 38
interarch tooth relationships in, 40-42
loading in, 142f, 146
mechanics of mandibular motion in,
45-48, 49f. See also Mandible,
movement of.
articulators and, 55-58, 59f, 60f
neurologic correlates and control of
mastication in, 61-62. See also
Mastication.
nonsupporting cusps in, 42-45, 46f
operative dentistry importance of, 13-15
posterior cusp characteristics in, 42, 43f
preoperative assessment of, 486, 658
static anatomic relationships in, 37-38,
418
supporting cusps in, 42, 43f, 44f
tooth alignment and dental arches in,
38-40, 41f
tooth preparation and, 273, 286. See also
Outline form.
class II
amalgam, 708-709
composite, 551
treatment planning and, 423
Occlusoaxial line angle, 758, 884
Occlusofacial class I amalgam restorations,
695,696f
Occlusofacial groove, 16
Occlusogingival proximal contour in class
II restorations, 728-729
Occlusolingual (OL) class I restorations,
690-695
initial procedures for, 690
restorative technique for, 694-695
tooth preparation for, 690-694
Occlusopulpal thickness of restorations, 148
Occupational Safety and Health Act of
1970, 350-351
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), 226-228
aseptic standards and, 350
bloodborne pathogens and, 351, 352-354
required training on, 356-358
creation of, 351
exposure incident plan and, 354
handling and transporting potentially
infectious material and, 379-380
Hazard Communications and, 351
instrument containers and, 370
needle resheathing technique of, 442-443
office exposure control plan of, 351-355
personnel training and, 355
records and, 355
Odontoblastic processes, 22
in dentin hardness and crystal deposition, 98f
Odontoblasts, 22-23
in dentin formation, 95
in tooth sensitivity, 26-27
pulpal protection in restorations and, 171
secondary, 24
Odontotomy, prophylactic, 277
Off-center arch form, 463-464, 465f

Office. See Dental office.
Offset condensers for direct gold in class
III gold restorations, 892, 896f,
897,898f
Oilstones, 317
Ointments, topical anesthetic, 441
OL class I restorations. See Occlusolingual
( OL) class I restorations.
Old restorations
composites in, 475
removal of material from, final tooth
preparation and, 294-295
Older adults. See Aging.
Omni-Depth gauge, 775, 777f
One Coat Bond, 247, 247t
One-component system, 185
1-o'clock position, 432
One-Step, 246f, 247t
hybrid layer and, 250
Onlay
ceramic, 574-579, 575t
defined, 579
laboratory-processed composite, 573,
574f, 575t
porcelain, 474, 475f
repair of tooth-colored, 588-589
Opacity, 140
Opaque porcelain, veneers and, 627
Operating field, 444-469, 448t
cellulose wafers in, 465-466
drugs and, 469
evacuators for
high-volume, 466-467,468f
tip retraction in, 469
inability to maintain dry, 571
isolation of
composite restorations and, 482
cotton roll, 465-466
goals in, 444-445
poor, 497
rubber dam. See Operating field, rubber dam isolation in.
mirror retraction in, 469
mouth props in, 469
retraction cord in, 468-469
rubber dam isolation in, 445-465, 448t
advantages of, 445-446
age variation for, 463, 464f
applying dam and retainer simultaneously in, 458-459
applying dam before retainer in, 459
cervical retainer placement in, 459-461
disadvantages of, 446
errors in application and removal and,
463-465
fixed bridge isolation in, 461, 462f
hole size and position in, 449-452, 453f
materials and instruments in, 446-449
placement of, 452-457
removal of, 457-458
substitution of retainer with matrix in,
461-463
saliva ejectors in, 466-467, 468f
throat shields in, 466, 467f
Operating position, 431-433
Operating stools, 433-434
Operative dentistry, 2-3, 429-470
conservative approaches in, 3
considerations in, 3
definition of, 2
dental health and, 5-7

I ndex

Operative dentistry-cont'd
dynamics of, 3-4
factors affecting, 2-3
future demand and, 4-8
future of, 8-9
factors affecting, 4-8
general health and, 5
history of, 2
in treatment planning, 423-426
indications for, 2-3
instrument exchange in, 434
magnification in, 434
operative field in, 444-469, 448t. See also
Operating field.
pain control in, 434-444, 435b, 435t. See
also Pain.
patient and operator positions in,
431-434
preoperative patient and dental team,
431-434
projected need for, 7-8
Operator
left-handed, 431-432
patient face proximity to, 433
position of, 431-434
rubber dam isolation and, 445-446
skills of
amalgam restorations and, 656
cast metal restorations and, 802
composite restorations and, 482
local anesthesia and, 436
Operatory asepsis, 365-369
Operatory environment, infection control
and, 347-349
Operatory surfaces, 365-366
Opfalloy II, 157t
OPIM. See Other potentially infectious
materials (OPIM).
Optec HSP, 575t
OptiBond, microleakage with, 254
OptiBond FL, 245
OptiBond Solo, 247,247t
OptiBond Solo Plus, 247
Optical impression in CAD/CAM restorations, 578
Optical properties, 139
Oral cancer, 6
Oral candidiasis, 357, 397
Oral contraceptives, 399
Oral flora. See also Bacteria.
cariogenic, 67
ecologic phenomena and, 74-75
oral hygiene and, 114
Oral habitats in plaque development, 78-80
Oral hygiene
clinical examination indicating, 417
in caries prevention, 114-121
in plaque development, 86-87
poor, 114f, 115f
treatment planning and, 424
Oral mucosa, 35-36
Oral surgery in treatment planning, 423
Orange discolored teeth, 609
Organic acids, plaque and, 67, 87-88
Organic filler composites, 195
Organizations, professional, 224, 224b
Orofacial soft tissues, 394t-395t, 406, Plate
9-1
Oropharyngeal cancer, 6
Orthoclase, 143t
Orthodontic pliers, sterilization of, 372

Orthodontic treatment
planning for, 423
stabilization of teeth after, 634-635
Orthopnea, 437
OSHA. See Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA).
Osmium, 215
Other potentially infectious materials
(OPIM), 379-380
Outer layer in tooth preparation, 277-278,
279f
Outline form and initial depth in tooth
preparation, 286-290, 487, 488
amalgam restoration, 659-661
class 1, 687, 688
class 11
gingival wall extension and, 704
occlusal, 697-699
occlusal extensions and, 714
proximal, 699-703
slot preparation for root caries in,
710-711
unusual, 712
class 111, 745, 752
class V, 755, 758, 759f
proximal surface in, 700f, 710f, 747f,
753f
cast metal inlay, 804
fissures in facial and lingual cusp
ridges in, 819-822
composite restoration, direct
class I, 546
class 11, 550
large or foundation, 564
class III, 505, 507, 513
class IV, 525
class V, 529, 530f, 532
cusp heights in, 288
gold restoration
class I, 878-879
class III, 889-890
class V, 882-884
instrumentation for, 884-885,
885f-886f, 887f
modified, 884
in pit-and-fissure lesions, 286-288, 532
in smooth-surface lesions, 275f, 288
proximal surface, 288-289, 700f, 710f,
747f, 753f
Oval finishing bur, 332t
Overbite, 40, 41f
occlusion and, 418
Overcarving in class I amalgam restorations, 684, 695
Overcontouring, 32, 33f
treatment planning for, 425
Overdose
of epinephrine, 443
of local anesthesia, 434
Overgarments, protective, 363-364
cleaning instruments and, 370
Overhangs, proximal, 409
treatment planning for, 425
Overjet, 40, 41f
occlusion and, 418
Overlap
horizontal, 40, 41f
occlusion and, 418
incisor, 40, 41f
vertical, 40, 41f
occlusion and, 418

Oxidation in amalgams, 152,156
Oxides, metallic, 135, 136
Oxirane, 204
Oxitane, 204
Oxychlorides in amalgam corrosion, 156
Oxygen concentration, plaque and, 78,
87-88
P

PAC. See Plasma arc curing (PAC).
Packable composites, 196, 478
properties of, 202t
Page-Chayes handpiece, 323f, 323t
Pain, 434-444, 435b, 435t
analgesia in, 443-444
dental
examination and diagnosis in, 418-421,
419b
patient inventory for, 419b
hypnosis in, 444
in dentinal caries, 96-97
inhalation sedation in, 443-444
local anesthesia in, 434-443, 435b, 435t
administration of, 436-443
benefits of, 436
patient factors in, 435-436
objective tests of, 418
perforation of pin-retained restoration
and, 785
transmission of, 258
hydrodynamic theory of, 27
Palisades, 70f-71f, 72f, 73f, 77
Palladium (Pd), 215t, 215-216, 216t
Palladium-silver alloys, 801
Palm-and-thumb grasp, 315-316
modified, 316
cast metal inlay and, 809f
Palodent Matrix System, 729
Palpation
for pain evaluation, 418
in examination and diagnosis, 415
Panavia, 259
Papilla, interdental, 36f, 37
molar contact area and, 34, 34f
Papillomavirus, human, 393, 394t-395t
Paramyxoviruses, 394t-395t, 396
Parasagittal plane of mandibular movement, 45
Parkinsonism drugs, 89t
Parotid gland infection, 398
Partial denture, removable. See Removable
partial denture, restorations for
abutment teeth of.
Partially avulsed teeth, 635-636
Particle. See also Particle size.
amalgam, 150,152
admixed, 654
geometry and size of, 149
glass ionomers and, 208, 209
removal of, 149, 761
spacing of, diamond abrasive instruments and, 338
Particle size, 192-193
in admixed amalgam, 654
in diamond abrasive instruments, 338
in filler, 194-196,197f
in hybrid composites, 477
in microfill composites, 477
in spherical amalgam, 654
light-curing process and, 201
Passivation, 136

I ndex

Passive metals, 135-136
Pathogens, bloodborne, 350-356
OSHA-required training on, 356-358
Patient
assessment of. See Patient assessment.
i n pain, 418-421, 419b. See also Pain.
position of, 431-434
protection of, rubber dam isolation in, 445
vulnerability of, to infection, 349
weight of, lidocaine with epinephrine
dosage and, 435t
Patient assessment, 389-401, 394t-395t
chief complaint in, 389
dental history in, 400, 401t
infection control in, 389
medical review in, 389-400, 394t-395t. See
also Medical review.
risk assessment in, 400-401, 401t
sociologic and psychologic review in, 400
Patient factors in tooth preparations,
273-274
Patient history in caries assessment, 102,
103t
Patient interview, 389
Patient inventory for diagnosing dental
pain, 419b
Patient record, 389. See also Patient
assessment.
Patient visits, 8, 389
P-chloro, meta-xylenole (PCMX) hand
cleansers, 363
PCMX hand cleansers. See P-chloro, metaxylenole (PCMX) hand cleansers.
PCR test. See Polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) test.
Pd. See Palladium (Pd).
PDL. See Periodontal ligament (PDL).
Pear finishing bur, 332t
Pear-shaped bur, 331, 332t
Peg lateral incisors, 237f
Pellets
alloy, 151
direct-filling gold, 211, 873, 878
class III restoration with, 896f, 897
class V restoration with, 886-888
Pellicle, 21, 70f-71f, 77
Pen grasp, 315, 316f
Penciclovir, 395t
Penetrating corrosion in amalgam alloy
reaction, 153-154
Penetration coefficient, 188
Penicillin
in gonorrhea, 395t, 398
in syphilis, 395t, 399
Penicillin-resistance, 398
PENTA. See Dipentaerythritol pentaacrylate monophosphate
(PENTA).
Pentron 1, 216t
Peptostreptococcus species, 77
Percent absorption, 139
Percent reflection, 139
Percent transmission, 139
Perceptive abilities of observer, 140
Percolation, 137-138
Percussion test, 414-415, 418
Periapical abscess, 413, 414f
Perikymata, 20, 72f
histology of, 93
plaque and, 70f-71f, 72f
Perikymata ridges, 72f, 93

Periodontal examination records, 404f, 416
Periodontal ligament (PDL), 37
i nflammation in, 418
principal fibers of, 37
Periodontal probe, 416
in pain evaluation, 418
in retraction cord placement, 486, 487f
Periodontics
in treatment planning, 422-423
operative dentistry and, 6, 7t
splints and, 632-634
Periodontitis in HIV infection, 357
Periodontium
anatomy, histology and physiology of,
36-37
attachment apparatus of, 37
examination and diagnosis of, 416-417
gingival unit of, 36f, 37
Peritubular dentin, 23
apposition of, 97
bonding for, 240
Permanent dentition, 15
Permanent threshold shift, 343
Permaquick PQ1, 247,248t
Personal protective equipment (PPE)
OSHA Bloodborne Disease Standard
and, 347, 352f, 353
term of, 352
tuberculosis technique and, 398
Personnel
hand-to-surface contamination and,
348-349
OSHA requirements for training of, 355
tuberculin testing of, 378
vulnerability of, to infection, 349
written exposure control plan and,
351-354
Pestles for mixing of amalgam alloy, 151
Petroleum jelly lubricant, 449
Peyer's patches, 112
PFM restorations. See Porcelain-fused-tometal (PFM) restorations.
pH
plaque and, 78, 90
salivary, 89, 90
Pharyngitis, 393
Phenolic derivatives, 367
Phentermine, 399
Phenyl-P. See 2-(Methacryloxy) ethyl
phenyl hydrogen phosphate
(Phenyl-P).
Phosphate ester-type bonding agent,
244-245
in resin-bonded bridges, 641
Phosphate ions in remineralization, 89-90
Phosphate-ester materials, 244
Phosphoric acid, 21, 238-239, 240f
before cementation in class 1 and 11
indirect restorations, 585f
before sealant use, 541
concentration of, 248, 249f
dentin bonding and, 29
in bleaching treatments, 610
in composite restorations, 492, 493
Photothermal effects, laser, 326-327
Physical bonding, 179, 180f
Physical properties, 137-140, 138t
Physiologic dentin sclerosis, 26
Physiology
aging and, 399-400
chewing, 61

Physiology-cont'd
esthetic dentistry and, 599
tooth and investing tissue, 13-15, 32-35.
See also Teeth.
contours in, 15, 32-33
embrasures in, 33-35
function in, 32
proximal contact area in, 33, 34f
Pickerill, imbrication lines of, 20
Pilocarpine, 400
Pin
broken, amalgam restorations and, 783
cementation of, 783, 784f
design of, 772t, 777t, 778-780
distance between, 774-775
in final tooth preparation, 298, 765f, 787f
insertion of, 780-782, 783f
location of, 773-775, 776f
loose, 783
number of, 773, 774f
pilot hole for, 776, 777f
pinhole and, 770, 783, 784f, 786
preparation of, 775-778, 777t
problems with, 783-785
retention of, 772-773
size of, 773
types of, 771-772, 772t
Pin channels, 770
preparation of, 775-778, 777t
Pindex system for split cast with removable dies, 847-851
Pinholes, 770
for cemented pins, 783, 784f, 786
preparation of, 775-778, 777t
Pin-retained amalgam restorations,
766-767. See also Amalgam
restorations, complex.
broken drills in, 783
broken pins in, 783
failure of, 783, 785f
for foundations, 786
loose pins in, 783
penetration into pulp of, 766, 783-785,
786f
perforation of external tooth surface in,
766, 783-785, 786f
tooth preparations for, 769-785, 769-787,
772t, 777t
final, 770-771
initial, 769-770
techniques in, 773-783, 777t. See also Pin.
Pistol grip of light-curing unit, 496f, 518f
Pit or fissure, 38, 276-277. See also Pit-andfissure sealants.
as habitat, 80-83, 84f, 85f
for Mutans streptococci, 75
caries diagnosis and, 104-105
initial tooth preparation in, 286-288
treatment decision-making in, 104t
caries-prone, 80-83, 84t, 91, 407
radiographs of, 406f
terminology and, 187,274-275
clinical examination of, 407, 408
developmental, cusp tip, 543-544
enamel, removal of remaining
final tooth preparation and, 294-295
initial tooth preparation and, 294
class V, 532-533
gold restoration for, 878, 879f
in plaque development, 80-83, 84f, 85f
tooth brushing and, 114

I ndex

Pit-and-fissure sealants, 541-542
caries prevention with, 121-123, 125t
clinical technique for, 541-542
ideal time to apply, 189
in extension for prevention, 542f
indications for, 541
penetration coefficients for, 188t
restoration, 187-190, 188t
Plain fissure bur, 332t
Plaque, 69-90
bacterial succession in, 72-73, 74f, 74t
early stages of, 70f-71f, 77, 77t
late stages of, 77-78, 79f
clinical examination of, 417
communities and habitats for, 72-73, 74f
energy flow through, 78, 79f, 88
structure of, 78
definition of, 66-67
introductory description and, 69-72,
73f
description of, 69-72, 73f
development of, 74-90
community structure in, 78
early stages of, 70f-71f, 77, 77t
ecologic determinants in, 78-90. See
also Plaque, ecologic determinants of.
growth in, 70f-71f, 73f, 76-77
late stages of, 77-78, 79f
ecologic determinants of, 78-90
nontooth habitats in, 78-80
nutrients in, 78f, 87-88
oral hygiene in, 86-87, 115
saliva in, 77t, 88-90, 89t
sulcular fluid in, 88
tooth habitats for pathogenic plaque
in, 80-87
enamel relationship to, 70f-71f
hypotheses in etiology of, 68-69
mechanical removal of, 114
pathogenicity of, 68
pH at tooth interface with, 90
terminology of, 69
Plasma arc curing (PAC), 198
improving, 480
Plasma-coated woven polyethylene strip,
633,634f
Plaster, impression, 213, 213t
Plastic bag for transporting impressions
and registrations, 379-380
Plastic covers
in asepsis concepts, 364-366
in preparing for next patient, 368
removal of, 367-368
Plastic deformation of impression materials, 214
Plastic matrix strip, 584, 585f. See also
Matrix strip.
Plastic spatula, disposable, 517
Plastic strain, 141, 142-143
in amalgam alloys, 157
Platinum (Pt)
catalyst for, 213-214
direct-filling gold and, 212
gold casting alloys and, 215, 215t, 216,
216t
Plunger cusp, 418
PMDM. See Pyromellitic acid diethyl
methacrylate (PMDM).
PMMA. See Polymethyl methacrylate
(PMMA).

Pneumatic condenser, disadvantage of, 731
Pneumatic mallet for direct gold, 875, 876
Pneumococcal pneumonia immunization,
361
Pneumocystis, 357
Pneumonia, pneumococcal, 361
Point angles, 280, 282f, 283
Polishing
amalgam restoration
class 1, 685-687, 686-687
class 11, 734-735
class 111, 753
class V, 761-762
mercury management after, 162
cast metal restoration, 856-858, 859f, 860f
861f, 862f
composite restoration
direct, 192, 193, 497, 521f, 550f, 562f
class 1, 550
class 11, 561-563
class 111, 521-523
class IV, 528
class V, 534
indirect, 584-587, 587t, 588f
difficulty of, 573
glass-ionomer restoration, 536
natural tooth pontic, 636-637
Polishing wheel, knife-edge rubber, 858
Polyacid-modified resin composites,
209-210, 478, 478t, 535
composition, structure, and properties
of, 2091
Polyacrylic acid liquid, 207, 535
Polyalkenoate, 218
Polyalkenoic cements, 218
Polycarboxylate
in pulpal protection in final tooth preparation, 296, 297
polyacrylic acid liquid of, 208
Polycarboxylate cement
cast metal restoration and, 260
composition, structure, and properties
of, 176t
glass ionomers and, 217-219, 218t
retention of, 219
Polyester matrix strip
class II amalgam restorations and, 729
composite restorations and, 492, 493f,
494,495f
class 11, 560
class 111, 514, 515-516
class IV, 526-527
in diastema correction, 603
Polyether impressions
classification of material for, 213, 213t
handling and transporting, 381-382
Polyethylene strip, plasma-coated woven,
633,634f
Polymer
chemical dissolution and, 144
definitions of, 136, 137f
filled, indirect restorations with, 573
Polymer glasses, 573
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test, 360
Polymerization, 136,137f
acrylic resin monomers and, 201-202
activation of, 201
excessive, 201
gel point in, 202
in composites, 194, 201-202, 479-481
in glass ionomers, 535-536

Polymerization-cont'd
in impression materials, 213
shrinkage from, 203-204
acrylic resin and, 476
composites and, 479-480
dentin adhesion and, 257-258
indirect class I and 11 restorations and,
572
soft-start, 202
stepwise, 136, 213
zone of, light intensity and, 200
Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), 136
direct-filling resins with, 138t
history of, 191
vital bleaching hazards and, 610
Polysulfide impression material, 213, 213t,
214f
Polyvinyl siloxane impression material,
845-846, 847f
classification of, 213, 213t
maximal interocclusal record with, 837,
838f
removing and inspecting, 846
technique for, 845-846, 847f
tray selection and preparation for, 845,
846f
Pontic
all-metal, 640-646, 647f
all-porcelain, 646-649
bonding of, conservative bridge technique and, 636
connection between adjacent tooth and,
638-639
denture tooth, 638-640
natural tooth, 636-638
porcelain fused-to-metal, 640-646, 647f
tip design for, 637f
Pop-On discs and mandrels, 522
Population statistics, 4
Porcelain
aluminous, thermal expansion in, 138t
feldspathic
class I and II inlays and onlays and,
574-575, 575t, 576f
hardness values for, 339t, 575t
modified, 222, 223t
treatment planning for, 426
veneers of, 620, 621, 624-627, 628f
fired on hot pressed glasses in indirect
restorations, 571, 575-578
fired on refractory dies in indirect
restorations, 571, 574-575
in all-porcelain pontic, 646-649
in porcelain-metal pontic, 645-646
in veneers, 620, 621, 624-627, 628f
repair systems and, 186
restorations
dentin etching and priming in, in
final tooth preparation,
298-299
fused, 474, 475f
treatment planning for, 426
silane coupling agent with, 259-260
thermal expansion and, 138t
Porcelain-fused-to-metal (PFM) pontic,
640-646, 647f
thermal expansion and, 138t
Porcelain-fused-to-metal (PFM) restorations, 214-215
thermal expansion in, 138t
Pore-free machined restorations, 222

I ndex

Position
in esthetic procedures, 596-597
of operator, 431-434
of patient, 431-434
Positional defects of teeth, minor, 596-597
Positive predictive value, 405-406
Posselt's diagram, 48, 49f
Postcarve burnishing in class I amalgam
restorations, 684
Postcuring, 201
Posterior teeth
common features of, 43f
facial/lingual slot tooth preparation for,
491
fracture of, 418-421
light-cured composites and, 561
mandibular motion and, 60f, 61
occlusion of
class I amalgam restorations and,
672
cusp characteristics and, 42, 43f
full-arch casts mounted on semiadjustable articulator and, 837,
839f
problems of, 61
treatment planning and, 540-541
pinhole placement and, 774-775
rubber dam isolation for, 450
working and nonworking sides of jaw
and, 61
Postoperative sensitivity
with amalgam restorations, 667
with composite restorations, 207
Potassium sulfate solution, 381
Potentially infectious materials, 379-380
Powder, amalgam alloy, 149-150
Powdered gold, 211, 212, 873, 874
Power bleaching, 610
Powered cutting instruments, 322-329
air-abrasive, 327-329
laser, 325t, 325-327, 327t
rotary, 322-324, 323t, 325f
speed range of, 324-325
PPD test. See Purified protein derivative
(PPD) test.
PPE. See Personal protective equipment
(PPE).
PQl, 247, 248t
Pre-capsulated amalgam, 151
Precarious pits on cusp tips, 407f, 408,
736f
Precarve burnishing in class II amalgam
restoration, 732
Precautions, universal, 228
Precious metal alloys, 215. See also Gold
alloys.
Precontoured bands for Universal retainer,
719
Precontoured matrix strips
for class II amalgam restorations,
729-730
for class II composite restorations, 560
Predentin, 23
Predictive value, positive, 405-406
Prefabricated posts, 769
Preliminary considerations for operative
dentistry, 429-470. See also
Operative dentistry.
Preloaded composite compule, 496f, 518f
Prema compound, 613
Premature ventricular contractions, 436

Premolar, 15, 15f, 16
classes I and II composite restorations
for, 539, 543, 544, 546, 554-557,
560, 561f
large restoration or foundation for,
564-565, 566f
fissure in, 543
mesiofacial corner of maxillary, 554-557
pinhole placement in, 774-775
restorations on occlusal surface of, 281,
282f
rubber dam isolation for, 450, 453f, 485
two separate faulty occlusal pits in, 548,
549f
vertical dimension and, 16,16f
Preoperative impression, alginate, 841-843
Preoperative patient positioning, 431-434
Preparation, clinical examination, 405
Preparation designs
in amalgam restoration tooth preparation, 664
in porcelain fused-to-metal or all-metal
pontics, 640
Preproportioned amalgam, 151
Prescription medications of older patients,
400
Pressed ceramic veneers, 621, 627, 629f
Preventive restorations, 271
resin (PRR), 277, 542-543
treatment planning and, 540-541
Prewedging for composite restorations,
504,523
Prilocaine, 435b, 435t
with epinephrine, 435b, 435t
Prime & Bond, 246f
Prime & Bond 2.0, 246f
Prime & Bond 2.1, 246f
hybrid layer and, 250
Prime & Bond NT, 246f, 248t
Priming
adhesion strategies and, 241t, 251
extensive class I amalgam restoration,
689-690
composite restorations and, direct
class 1, 548-549
class II, 558
large or foundation, 565
class 111, 514-515
class IV, 526
class V, 533
placement of, in final tooth preparation,
298-299, 494
retention form and, 293
Principal fibers of periodontal ligament, 37
Prism, enamel. See Enamel rods or prisms.
Prisma Universal Bond, 244
Probe, periodontal, 416
pain evaluation and, 418
retraction cord placement and, 486, 487f
Procaine, central nervous system depression with, 436
Process indicator strips in sterilization, 375
Processed composite veneers, 620, 621-624
Prodigy, 202t
Professional organizations, 224, 224b
Professional tooth cleaning, 120-121
Profilometers, 193
Prompt L-Pop, 250
Prongs for rubber dam isolation, 446-447,
448f
Propagation, polymerization and, 201

Prop/guard card, 437-438, 439f-440f
Prophylactic antibiotics, 436
Prophylactic odontotomy, 277
Proportional limit, 141, 142
Proportionality, 595-596, 604
Prosthesis, tooth adjacent to. See Removable partial denture, restorations
for abutment teeth of.
Prosthodontics
fixed, treatment planning and, 423
removable. See Removable partial denture, restorations for abutment
teeth of.
Protection theory of wear, 205
Protective eyewear, 343, 363
cleaning instruments and, 370
herpes simplex virus and, 393
tuberculosis and, 398
Protective masks. See Mask.
Protective overgarments, 363-364
cleaning instruments and, 370
Proteins
in dentin adhesion, 254
plaque bacteria and, 77t, 87-88
Proteolytic enzymes, 88
Protocol, exposure assessment, 361-364
Protrusion, 48, 49f, 50
mandibular movement, interferences in,
863
Provirus form of RNA retrovirus, 356
Proximal box
amalgam restoration, class II, 699-703
amount needed for, 730
conserving tooth structure in, 701
gingival floor in, 555f, 700f, 704-705,
715
no occlusal step in, 710
proximal extensions in, 714-715, 770f,
774f
cast metal restoration and
inlay, 806-808, 809f, 813f, 814f
onlay, 828-829
composite restoration, class II
conventional, 552-557
large restoration or foundation in, 564
Proximal contacts, 33, 33f, 34f
adjustment of
cast restorations and, 860-862, 866f
complex amalgam restorations and,
793, 794, 795f
indirect tooth-colored restorations
and, 583-584
improper, 410
treatment planning for, 425
lubricating, rubber dam isolation and,
33, 34f
weak or missing, composite restorations
and, 498
wear on, 204f, 205
Proximal contours, 289, 425
Proximal ditch cut
amalgam restorations and, 699-701
cast metal restorations and, 806, 807f
composite restorations and, 553
Proximal embrasure areas. See Embrasures.
Proximal locks, controversy over, 667
Proximal outline form. See Proximal box.
Proximal overhangs, 409
Proximal surfaces of teeth
anterior, class III amalgam restorations
for, 743

I ndex

Proximal surfaces of teeth-cont'd
box-only tooth preparation for, 491
clinical examination for, 406f, 407f, 408
contouring and polishing of, restoration
amalgam, 728-729
composite, 522-523
facial/lingual slot tooth preparation for,
491, 558f
in initial tooth preparation, 288-289
for class III restoration, 504, 511
overcontoured, in indirect restoration
try-in, 583
Proximofacial line angle, 729
Proximoocclusal preparation, 281
PRR. See Preventive restorations, resin
(PRR).
Pseudomonas, 377
Pseudoplastic behavior, 143,144f
Psychologic review, 400
Psychology, local anesthesia and, 436-437
Pt. See Platinum (Pt).
Public Health Service guidelines for
infection control, 350
Public perception of dentistry, 8
Pull-cut Shooshan file, 897
Pulp blood supply, 99
Pulp capping
direct
operative treatment of caries and, 129
prognosis for, cast metal inlay and, 810
in infection prevention, 255
indirect, 100
operative treatment of caries and, 128,
130
Pulp cavity, 15, 30-31
Pulp chamber
extensions into, composite restorations
and, 563
retention and, amalgam foundations
and, 787
Pulp injury
complex amalgam restoration preparation and, 766, 783-785, 786f
heatin,340
Pulp irritation
after restorations, 255
microleakage and, 254
Pulp medication in restorations, 170,
173-174, 175t, 176t
schematic of, 171f
Pulp necrosis, 31
Pulp protection, 171-172
amalgam restoration and, 663
class 1, 677-679, 680f, 681f
class I extensive, 688
liners and bases for, 688, 689f
class II, 703f, 704f, 705, 715
both proximal surfaces involved in,
689f, 703f, 704f, 715
complex, 766, 783-785, 786f
cast metal restoration
inlay, 808-812
onlay, 829
composite restoration and, 488, 492
cutting instruments and, 342
in final tooth preparation, 295-298
liners and bases for, 170, 171-174, 688,
689f
notched area and, 532
Pulp stones, 413
Pulp tester, 415, 418

Pulp wall, 279, 282f
amalgam restorations and, 660f
class 11, both proximal surfaces in, 690f
primary resistance form in, 272f, 290
Pulp-dentin complex
anatomy, histology and physiology of,
22-31
caries in, 97
Pulpitis
irreversible, 31, 97
examination and diagnosis of, 415
reversible, 31, 97
Pumice
for surface stains, 606f
in abrasive instruments, 339, 339t
in microabrasion, 612-613
in slurry on bristle brush for cleansing,
541, 542f
Punch, rubber dam, 448, 449f
Punch cut
amalgam restorations and
class 1, 673, 675f
class II, 697, 698f
cast metal restorations and, 805f
Purified protein derivative (PPD) test, 361,
378,398
Pyrogenic silica, 197
Pyromellitic acid diethyl methacrylate
(PMDM), 244t
Q
QTH units. See Quartz-tungsten-halogen
(QTH) light-curing systems.
Quadrant dentistry, 735, 736f
Quartz
hardness test of, 143t
in abrasive instruments, 339, 339t
in composites, 192
Quartz-tungsten-halogen (QTH) lightcuring systems, 198
i mproving, 480
R
Radiation
absorption of, 140
salivary glands and, 89
Radiography
caries assessment, 102-103, 401t, 406,
409f, 412-413, 413b, 414f
accuracy of, 106
smooth surfaces in, 105-107
clinical situations indicating, 413b
guidelines for prescribing, 401t
high-speed film for, 105
peridontal health assessment, 417
Radioimmunoassay test, 361
Radiometer for light output monitoring,
199
Radiopacity, 140
of composites, 479
Rake angle, 336
Rake face, 336
Rampant caries, 276, 406f
Rapid caries in infected dentin, 277-278,
279f
Rash in syphilis, 399
Ratchet-type mouth prop, 469
RDT. See Remaining dentin thickness
(RDT).
Reaction product matrix, 152, 153f
Reactive dentin sclerosis, 26

Recall appointments, 389
with extensive direct class II restorations
or foundations, 566-567
Recapture system for heavy metals,
166-167
Reclined position, 431
Recombivax B, 360
Recontouring jaws of retainer, 448, 449f
Records, 389, 402, 403f-404f
chairside assistant and, 405
incident reports as, 227
Recurrent caries, 276, 277f
clinical examination of, 406f, 410
treatment planning for, 425
Reevaluation appointment, 389
Reevaluation phase in treatment planning,
422
Reflection, 139
Reflective mucosa, 36
Reflux, gastroesophageal, 411
Refraction, 139, 140
Refractive index, 140
Refractory dies for laboratory-processed
inlays and onlays, 575, 576f
Registrations
infection control for, 379-382
procedures for handling, in on-site laboratory, 382
Regulatory standards, 224
Rehabilitation, dental, cast metal alloys in,
801
Reinforced-resin zinc oxide-eugenol
cement. See Zinc oxide-eugenol
(ZOE) cement, resin-modified.
Remaining dentin thickness (RDT),
174-177
glass ionomers and, 211
Remineralization
brown spots and, 414f. See also Brown
spots.
dentin bonding and, 254
discoloration and, 90
episodic caries and, 94f, 95
fluoride treatment and, 110, lllf
histology of, 93-94, lllf
hydroxyapatite crystals and, 90
intertubular dentin and, 97
pH and, 67
root caries and, 107-108
saliva in, 89-90
white spots and, 408. See also White
spots.
Removable appliances in orthodontic treatments, 634
Removable partial denture, restorations for
abutment teeth of
amalgam
class 11, 713
matrix placement and, 721
class V, 744
cast metal, 801
treatment planning and, 423
Repair
of amalgam, 170, 259, 666
of cast metal restoration cement seal,
866-867
of direct composite restorations, 497,
498
of tooth-colored inlays and onlays,
588-589
Reparative dentin, 24, 25f, 98-99

I ndex

Replacement restorations
clinical failure and, 168-169
projected need for operative dentistry
and, 7
tooth preparation for composite,
489-490,491E
Reports, incident, 227. See also Records.
Research trends, 8-9
Resheathing of needle, 442
Residual alloy particles, 152
Residual caries, 275, 276, 704E
in final tooth preparation, 294-295
Resilience, 142
Resin
ceramic-optimized, indirect restorations
with, 573
liner content of, 172
preventive restorations and, 277, 542-543
shrinkage of, 237
temporary restorations and, 582
Resin cements, 219
adhesion strategies and, 241t
for composite restorations, 481E
in operative treatment of caries, 129
modified glass-ionomer. See Glass
ionomers, resin-modified.
with zinc oxide-eugenol. See Zinc
oxide-eugenol (ZOE) cement,
resin-modified.
Resin composites, term of, 191. See also
Composite.
Resin interdiffusion zone, 29
Resin tags, 181, 182E
in composite restorations, 481E
Resin-based composites, term of, 191. See
also Composite.
Resin-bonded mandibular natural-tooth
pontic, 638
Resin-bonded maxillary denture tooth
pontic, 638-640
Resin-bonded maxillary natural-tooth
pontic, 636-638
Resin-bonded porcelain fused-to-metal or
all-metal pontics, 640-646, 647E
advantages of, 640
types of, 640-642
Resin-bonded splints in esthetic procedures, 632-636
Resin-containing composites, term of. See
Composite.
Resin-dentin interface, stress at, 243-244
Resin-modified glass-ionomer base. See
Glass ionomers, resin-modified
(IRM; RMGl).
zinc oxide-eugenol cement with. See
Zinc oxide-eugenol (ZOE)
cement, resin-modified.
Resin-opaquing agents
in direct full veneers, 619, 620E
in repair of faulty veneers in metal
restorations, 631
Resin-reinforced composites with zinc
oxide-eugenol. See Zinc
oxide-eugenol (ZOE) cement,
resin-modified.
Resin-reinforced glass ionomers. See Glass
ionomers, resin-modified (IRM;
RMGI).
Resin-reinforced zinc oxide-eugenol
cement. See Zinc oxide-eugenol
(ZOE) cement, resin-modified.

Resin-to-resin bonding difficulties, 573
Resistance, colonization, 75
Resistance form
amalgam restoration, 662-663, 663-664
class 1, 672-673, 676
extensive, 688
class 11, 702-703, 705-706
complex, 765, 766
cast metal onlay and, 831-835
collar in, 833-835
skirt in, 831-833, 834E
slot in, 835
composite restoration, 488
class I, 544
class 111, 506
class IV, 524
final tooth preparation and, 298-299
gold restoration, 890
initial tooth preparation and, 290-292
of restored tooth, 280
primary, 290-292
amalgam restoration, 662-663
class 1, 676, 688
class 11, 702-703
secondary
amalgam restoration, 663-664
class 11, 705-706
final tooth preparation and, 298-299
Resorption, internal, examination of, 413
Respiratory difficulty, 437
Respiratory syncytial virus, 393, 394t-395t
Respiratory system, anesthesia and, 436
Respiratory viruses, 393, 394t-395t
Rest lines, 92
Restoration, removal of defective, onlay
cast metal restorations and, 829
Restorations. See also specific restoration
class.
adhesion in. See Adhesion.
amalgam in. See Amalgam restorations.
anatomic form in, 35, 36E
as habitats for plaque communities, 66E
caries control, 126-130
amalgam in, 128f, 129f, 655
clinical indications for, 655, 656-657
controversies in procedure for, 129-130
medical model in, 126t
objectives and indications for, 126-127
operative technique for, 127-129, 130E
caries prevention, 123-125
cast metal. See Cast metal restorations.
cements for, 217-220, 218t, 219t. See also
Cement.
clinical failure of, 168-10, 169t
composites in, 190-207, 194t, 202t,
471-500. See also Composite; Composite restorations; specific
restoration class.
compromised, tooth-colored class I and II
indirect restorations for, 571
computer-generated, 9
contouring of, periodontal health and,
417
control, complex amalgam indirect
restorations and, 765
defects in, 123
class III restoration for, 506, 511
class V restoration for, 530
dental pulp protection in. See Dental
pulp, protection of.
dentin and, 27-28. See also Dentin.

Restorations-cont'd
direct
composite. See Composite restorations;
specific restoration class.
defined, 148
direct-filling gold in, 211-212
esthetics and, 594. See also Esthetics.
future for operative dentistry and,
7-8
examination and diagnosis of, 401t,
406-416, 413b
abrasions in, 412
adjunctive aids in, 414-416
amalgam restorations in, 409-410, 411E
attrition in, 412
caries in, 401t, 406-409
cast restorations in, 410
chemical erosion in, 411, 412E
composite and other tooth-colored
restorations in, 410f, 411
electric pulp tester in, 415
idiopathic erosion in, 411, 412E
nonhereditary, hypocalcified enamel
in, 411
palpation in, 415
percussion test in, 414-415
radiography in, 401t, 406f, 409f,
412-413, 413b, 414E
study casts in, 416
thermal test in, 415
failed
classes 1, II, and VI amalgam restorations for, 671
sealants and, 190
glass ionomer. See Glass ionomers.
impression materials for, 212-214, 213t
incipient lesion, 424
indirect. See also specific restoration
class.
defined, 148
dentin adhesion in, 259-261
interim, all-porcelain pontics on, 647. See
also Interim restoration.
large
amalgam in, 655
bonding of, 667-668
class I restoration, 687-690
cast metal, 801
tooth-colored class I and II indirect,
571
liners and bases in, 170-177, 174t, 175t,
176t. See also Liners and bases.
machining approaches for, 220t, 220-224,
222b, 223t
marginal deterioration in, 158, 159E
materials for. See Dental materials,
restoration.
occlusopulpal thickness of, 148
pain evaluation and. See Pain.
pit-and-fissure sealants in, 187-190, 188t.
See also Pit-and-fissure sealants;
Sealants.
recent trends in, 237
removing nidus of infection by, 75
replacement or repair of, 271
projected need for operative dentistry
and, 7
resurfacing in, 425
tooth-colored class I and II indirect
restorations for, 571
treatment planning for, 425

I ndex

Restorations-cont'd
small, cast metal disadvantages for, 802
smoothness of surface of, 170. See also
Surface properties.
supporting cusps and, 42
technique for. See Restorative
technique.
temporary. See Temporary restorations.
tooth preparation for. See Tooth
preparation.
tooth-colored. See Tooth-colored
restorations.
veneers and. See Veneers.
Restorative materials. See Dental materials,
restoration.
Restorative technique
amalgam, 664-666
composite, 492-497
class I, 548-550
class II, 558-563
class III, 514-523
class IV, 526-528
class V, 533-534
contouring in, 496-497
matrix placement in, 494-495
microfill, 497
polishing in, 497
preliminary steps for enamel and
dentin bonding in, 492-494
Rests, 315f, 316
indirect, 316
Retainer
gold restorations and, 880-882, 888
metal, all-metal pontic with, 640-646,
647f
removable orthodontic, 634
rubber dam, 446-448, 448t, 459-461
anchor tooth applications of, 448t
bow of, 448
cervical, placement of, 459-461
class V amalgam restoration and, 754
composite restorations and, 485
modeling compound in securing, 449,
455
modification of, 882f
positioning dam over, 453, 454f
recontouring jaws of, 448, 449f
removal of, 457, 458f
selection of, 453, 454f
substitution for, matrix in, 461-463
testing stability and retention of, 453,
454f
timing of application of, 458-459
tips of, 465
winged or wingless, 447-448
Retainer forceps, 448, 449f
Retention
conservative bridge, 636
of cast metal restorations, 217
of complex amalgam restorations. See
Amalgam restorations, complex.
of composite restorations, 498, 563
of denture tooth pontic by undercuts,
639
of pins, 772-773
sealant for, 187
Retention form, 292-293
amalgam restoration, 662, 663f, 663-664
class I
extensive, 688
occlusolingual, 693

Retention form-cont'd
amalgam restoration-cont'd
class II, 705-706, 715
class III, 746f, 748, 749, 750
class V, 756-758
complex, 765, 766
mechanical, 659
cast metal restorations and, 293
inlay, 805, 806f
cusp reduction for capping and,
822-824
onlay, 831-835
composite restoration, 487-488
class 11, with large restoration or foundation, 564, 565f
class 11I, 506
class IV, 525
class V, 528, 529, 530
enhanced in onlay cast metal restorations, 831-835
in collar preparation, 833-835
in skirt preparation, 831-833, 834f
in slot preparation, 835
final, 298-299
gold restoration, 890
primary, 292-293
amalgam restoration, 662, 663f
class I, extensive, 688
class III, 748
secondary
amalgam restoration, 663-664
class I, 693
class 11, 705-706
class I1I, 748, 749
final tooth preparation and, 298-299
Retention grooves or coves, 298
amalgam restoration
class 11, 711
class III, 748-751, 752f, 757f
class V, 756-758, 757f
complex, 767, 768f, 770, 771f
cast metal inlay, 808, 809f
composite restoration
class III, 505f, 506, 508-509
class IV, 525
class V, 528, 529, 530, 532
primary retention form and, 293
Retention locks
amalgam restoration
class II, 705-706, 707f
controversial issues with, 705
proximal extensions in, 715
complex, 767, 768f, 770, 771f
controversial issues with proximal,
667
final tooth preparation and, 663f
final tooth preparation and, 298, 663f
Retention undercuts in class IV restoration,
525
Retraction
access and, 445
of cheek, 433
Retraction cord, 468-469
amalgam restorations and, class V,
754-755, 761
cast metal restorations and
inlay, 808, 810f, 813f
onlay, 829
composite restorations and, 485-486, 487f
tissue retraction in final impressions
and, 843-845

Retrovirus, RNA, 356
Retrusion, 50
Retzius, striae of. See Striae of Retzius.
Reverse bevel, 819, 820f, 822, 823f
Reversible caries, 276, 406f, 414f
Reversible hydrocolloid impression
material
classification of, 213, 213t
handling and transporting, 381-382
Reversible pulpitis, 31, 97
Rewetting agents, 185
Rexillium III, 260f
Rhinoviruses, 393, 394t-395t
Rhodium, 215
Ribavirin, 396
Ribbond, 633, 634f
Rifampin, 395t
Right front operating position, 431, 432f
Right front position, 432
Right operating position, 431, 432f
Right position, 433
Right rear operating position, 431, 432f
Right rear position, 433
Right-angle hand condensers for direct
gold technique, 897f
Rimantadine, 395t
Rinsing of mouth in oral hygiene, 114,
120
Risk
amalgam use, 158-160
assessment of patient, 349,400-401,
401t
caries, 102b, 103, 107
cast metal restorations and, 801-802
cervical lesions and, 743
exposure
federal and state regulations to
reduce, 350-356
infection control and, 347-350
HIV, 357-358
tooth preparation for restorations and,
273
RMGI. See Glass ionomers, resinmodified (IRM; RMGI).
RNA retrovirus, 356
Rochette resin-bonded bridge, 640-641
for maxillary incisors, 642f, 644
for maxillary premolars, 646
Rockwell hardness test, 142
Rods, enamel. See Enamel rods or prisms.
Root
caries of
clinical examination for, 407f,
408-409
contraindications to composite
restorations for, 503, 539-540
diagnosis of, 107-108, 275-276
final tooth preparation for, 298, 529f
inactive, 424
initiation of, 92
older patients with, 535
operative dentistry and, 5-6, 6t, 7t
projected need for, 6t, 7
slot preparation for, 710-712
treatment planning for, 424-425
resorption of, cementum and, 31, 32f
tooth preparation extension proximity
to, 289
Root surfaces
exposed, pain evaluation in, 421, 425
plaque development in, 84-85

I ndex

Root surfaces-cont'd
restorations for
amalgam, 659
cast metal, 817, 819E
composite
class 1I, 554, 555f, 563
class III, 505
class V, 528-529, 530, 532
retention in, 499
tooth preparation for, 488, 489E
glass ionomer, 535
sensitivity of, treatment planning and,
425
Ropes of direct-filling gold, 211
Rotary powered cutting instruments,
329-340, 332t, 334t, 337t, 339t
abrasive, 338-340
dental burs in, 330-336. See also Bur.
design characteristics of, 329-330
development of, 322-324, 323t, 325E
head of, 329f, 330
neck of, 329f, 330
parts of, 329E
speed range of, 324-325
sterilization of, 378-379
Rotated teeth
class II amalgam restorations in, 712
esthetic dentistry and, 597
Rotation
mandibular, 45, 47f, 48
of patient's head, 433
Round burs, 331, 332t
Round crosscut bur, 332t
Round finishing bur, 332t
Round toothpick wedge for amalgam
restoration, 723, 724E
Rounding of bur sharp tip corners, 333
Routine initial visit, 389
Rubber abrasive disc
in macroabrasion, 613, 614E
in tooth contour alterations, 600E
Rubber abrasive point, reshaping of, 762
Rubber band isolation, 463, 464E
Rubber dam isolation, 127, 128f, 445-465,
448t
advantages of, 445-446
age variation and, 463, 464E
applying dam and retainer simultaneously in, 458-459
applying dam before retainer in, 459
before sealant use, 541, 542E
cervical retainer placement in,
459-461
modification of, 882E
defining operative field with, 445
disadvantages of, 446
fixed bridge isolation in, 461, 462E
in bleaching treatments, 610
in class I amalgam restorations, 672
in composite restorations, 485, 486E
in control of contamination from spatter
and aerosol, 378
in inhalant precautions, 344
in moisture control, 444. See also Rubber
dam isolation.
in tooth preparation, 285
materials and instruments for,
446-449
mercury vapor and, 162
of natural tooth pontic, 637

Rubber dam isolation-cont'd
placement of, 452-457
access and visibility in, 457
confirming proper, 457
dental tape carrying septum through
tight contact in, 456
errors in removal and, 463-465
fasciolingual inversion in, 456, 457E
hole size and position in, 449-452,
453E
interproximal inversion in, 456
measuring hole positions in, 452, 453E
passing septa through contacts in,
455-456
wedges for, 457
removal of, 457-458
errors in,463-465
substitution of retainer with matrix in,
461-463
thicker, class V lesions and, 446, 452
Rubber dam lubricant, 449, 453, 454E
Rubber dam napkin, 448-449
applying, 454
positioning, 454
Rubber dam punch, 448,449f
Rubber dam retainer. See Retainer, rubber
dam.
Rubber matrix in molded abrasive instruments, 339
Rubber polishing point in composite
restoration, 521f, 522, 550
Rubber polishing wheel, knife-edge, 858
Rubber-based impression material, 213,
213t
handling and transporting, 380-381
Rubbing inlay wax, 718
Rubella, 393-396
Rubeola, 394t-395t
history of, 396
respiratory transmission of, 393
Rule-of-mixture principle, 137
Runout, 335-336
Rust inhibitors, 309, 369
Rusting of hand instruments, 309, 310
Ruthenium, 215
Rx Honing Machine, 318, 319E
S
Safety
and efficacy of restorative materials,
224b,224-228
with amalgam, 653, 667
categories of responsibilities in, 226-228
for dental professionals, 226-229
instruments and equipment and, 227,
342-344
Sagittal view of mandibular motion, 51f,
51-54
Saliva
antibacterial activity of, 77t, 89, 89t,
112-113
artificial, older adults and, 400
as potentially infectious material, 352
in handpiece contamination, 376
buffers in, 89
caries assessment and, 102
local anesthesia and, 436
medications and, 89t, 110
operating field and, 444-445
oral habitat and, 80

Saliva-cont'd
plaque and, 77t, 88-90, 89t, 101
ecosystem of, 88
oral hygiene and, 87-88
remineralization and, 89-90
Saliva ejectors, 466-467, 468E
in rubber dam isolation, 456-457
Salivary analyses in caries assessment,
102
Salivary enzymes, 77t
Salivary glands, 77t, 89
Salivary stimulants in older adults, 400
Salivary-gland disease, 398
Sandwich technique for composite restorations, 304
Sarcoma, Kaposi s, 357, 397, Plate 9-1
Saucer-shaped notch, composite restoration for, 531
Scaling in initial examination, 405
Scanning electron microscopy of tinmercury alloy, 153, 154E
Scattering, 140
Sclerotic dentin, 26, 97-98, 257
advanced carious lesions and, 100
clinical examination for, 408
in treatment planning, 424
Scotchbond, 244
Scotchbond 2, 245
Scotchbond MultiPurpose, 245
Scotchbond Multi-Purpose Plus, 259
Scrap amalgam, 162
Sealants. See also Pit-and-fissure sealants.
amalgam restoration, 655
class 1, 679-681
occlusolingual, 694
class 1I, 717-718
class I1I, 752-753
class V, 758-759
controversy over, 667-668
caries prevalence and, 121
caries prevention with, 121-123, 125t
caries resistance and, 83
dentin and, 220
ideal time to apply, 189
in chemical protection of liners, 174
in extension for prevention, 277, 542E
in final tooth preparation, 295, 296, 297,
301-303
indications for, 189-190
long-term benefit of, 190
new, 3, 4
Sealed transport bags, 379-380
Seat of tooth preparation, 279f, 280
Seated work position, 433-434
Seating
of casting and adjusting proximal contacts, 860-862, 866E
of restoration
and stress transfer, 146
with cement displacement, 220
with linings and bases, 171, 172-173
Second stage of tooth preparation.
See Tooth preparation, final
stage of.
Second-generation adhesives, 244, 248b
Secretory IgA, 77t
Sedation, inhalation, 443-444
Seizures, 436
Self-cleansing of occlusal surfaces, 187
Self-cured liners, 259

I ndex

Shear bond strength, 177-179, 181t
Self-cured materials
composite restorations and
between amalgam and dentin, 259
class 111, 517-520
testing of, 256-257
polymerization in, 480
Shear strain versus shear stress, 143, 144f
in glass-ionomer restorations, 535
Sheath, enamel, 17
in splints for avulsed teeth, 635
Sheets of direct-filling gold, 211, 873
insertion of, 495-496
Shield, throat, 466, 467f
Self-curing sealants, 187-188
Shingles, 393, 394t-395t, Plate 9-1
Self-etching dentin adhesive systems, 241t,
Shock, anaphylactic, 399, 436
Short-cycle high-temperature dry heat
248-250
Self-etching primers (SEPs), 248-250, 251
ovens, 373-374
Shrinkage
Self-threading pins, 771, 772
Semicritical items in operatory asepsis, 366
composite, stress and, 203-204
liquid sterilants and high-level disinfecpolymerization. See Polymerization,
tants for, 376
shrinkage from.
resin, 237
Semicrystalline ceramics, 136
Semierect position in epinephrine overSiC. See Silicone carbide (SiC).
Silanating of machined restorations, 222
dose, 443
Sensitivity
Silane coupling agents
cervical, 258
history of, 192
in operator technique for indirect
in repair
restorations, 572
of inlay and onlay class I and II
indirect restorations, 589
notched lesion and, 532
of dental materials, 144-145
of veneers, 630-631
of test, 405
on all-porcelain pontics, 649
postoperative
on etched porcelain, 626
amalgam restorations and, 667
in ceramic restorations, 259, 260
composite restorations and, 207
Silane primer, 626
exposure of root surfaces and, 425
Silica
to local anesthetics, 399, 435
in composites, 192, 196, 197
in glass matrix for ceramic inlays and
to mercury, 158
tooth, 26-27
onlays, 574
structure of, 137
Sensory feedback, mastication and, 61
SEPs. See Self-etching primers (SEPs).
) 2 Silcates(O
cement
Seres, 76, 77
Serology, 357
failure of, 475
Setting reaction of liners, 173-174
history of, 191, 475
Setting time of bonding adhesive, 517
ceramics and, 136
7-o'clock position, 431, 432f
microfillers of, 197
Silicoating in resin-bonded bridges, 641
Sevriton Cavity Seal, 244
Sewage treatment plant, 165-168
Silicon, glass ionomer release of, 210
Shade selection
Silicone carbide (SiC)
composite restoration, 483-485
for sharpening stones, 317
improper, 498
hardness test of, 143t
esthetic dentistry and, 598
in abrasive instruments, 339
guides for, 139, 484
hardness values for, 339t
mixing two or more shades together in,
particles of, microabrasion and, 613
single crystals of, 196
484
Shadowing in esthetic dentistry, 594, 597
Silicone impression material
Shank
classification of, 213, 213t
in condenser for direct gold, 876
procedures for handling and transportin diamond instruments, 337
ing, 380-381
in hand cutting instruments, 310
Silver (Ag)
in rotary cutting instruments, 329-330
ceramics with, 795
Shape
in gold casting alloys, 215, 215t, 216
as artistic element, 594-595
waste management of, 165-168
naturaltooth
Silver cermets, 795
alterations in, 599-601
Silver-mercury amalgam alloy, 153
pontic and, 636-637
Silver-palladium amalgam alloy, 209,215
Sharpeners, mechanical, 317-318, 319f
Silver-tin amalgam alloy, 148
Sharpening of hand cutting instruments,
glass ionomers and, 208, 209
316-322
reaction product phases of, 153
principles of, 318
Simple tooth preparation, 279, 282f
Sharpening stones
Single Bond, 247, 248t
handpiece, 318
Single-beveled instruments, 311, 312f
stationary, 317
Sintering shrinkage, 575
Sharpey's fibers, 31, 32f, 37
Si0 2 . See Silicates (Si02).
Sharpness test, 321-322
Skeletal muscle relaxants, 89t
Skin complexion, teeth appearance and,
Sharps, rules for safe disposal of, 352-354
Shear, 140
607

Skin lesions
in chickenpox, 393, Plate 9-1
in syphilis, 399
Skin tests for tuberculosis, 361, 398
Skirt, 298
cast metal preparations and
inlay, 824
onlay, 831-833, 834f
Sliding tooth contact movements, 38, 45
mandibular motion limits and, 48
Slot preparation, 298
for glass-ionomer restorations, 535
for mandibular second molar onlay, 835
for root caries in class lI amalgam
restorations, 710-712
Slot-retained complex amalgam restorations. See also Amalgam restorations, complex.
for foundations, 768f, 786-787
initial procedures for, 767-768
matrix removal in, 793, 795f
tooth preparation for, 768f, 785-786,
787f
Slow caries, 276, 414f, 420f
infected dentin and, 277, 279f
Slow-speed handpiece, 128
Sludge, toxic amalgams and, 166
Small objects, aspiration or swallowing of,
466,467f
Smear layer, 179, 180
bonding and, 182
dentin, 240
final tooth preparation and, 302
on cut dentin, 28
pulpal protection in, 171, 172, 173f, 342
removal of, 242
Smear plugs, 28, 29f
removal of, 242, 243f
Smile, artistic elements of, 593, 594, 599
Smooth surfaces
caries on, 86f, 91-92
clinical examination for, 406f, 407f, 408
diagnosis of, 105-107
initial tooth preparation in restorations for, 275f, 288
class V, 532-533
terminology for, 275
enamel
caries diagnosis and, 105-107
caries initiation on, 86f, 91-92
plaque on, 80f, 83, 84f, 85f, 86f, 87f,
114f
Sn-Hg amalgam alloy. See Tin-mercury
(SnHg) amalgam alloy.
Sociologic review, 400
Sodium fluoride solution, lilt
Sodium hypochlorite. See Hypochlorite.
Sodium nitrite crystals, 372
Sodium perborate, 608, 609
Sof-Lex, 522
Soft tissues
lacerations of, 635
orofacial, examination and diagnosis of,
394t-395t, 406, Plate 9-1
protection of
cutting instruments and, 342-343
tooth preparation and, 285
Soft-tissue flap in class V restoration, 744
Solid wastes, 228. See also Waste disposal.
Solubility, composites and, 479

I ndex

Solution liners, 171, 172, 173f, 174t
survival of, 177
SOPS. See Standard operating procedures
(SOPS).
Sorption, 144
water, resin-dentin interface, 243
Space distribution of teeth in diastema correction, 601-604, 605f
Spatter
contamination through, 348, 378
protective overgarments for, 363-364
Specialized mucosa, 36
Specific gravity of materials, 138-139
Specific plaque hypothesis, 68
Specificity of test, 405
Spectral output in light-curing variables,
198, 199f
Spectrum, electromagnetic, 140
Speed range of rotary cutting instruments,
324-325
Spheraloy, 157t
Spherical amalgam, 654
controversy over, 667
in complex restorations, 791
insertion of, 665
particles of alloy in, 150
Spindles, enamel, 19, 20f
Spinel, 222
Spiral angle of bur, 334
Spiral bacteria, 73, 74f, 74t
Spirochetes, 73, 74f, 74t, 86
Spiro-orthocarbonates, 204
Splint, acid-etched, resin-bonded, 632-636
Splint-Grid, 633
Splitting forces, cast metal restorations
and, 802
Spoon excavators
amalgam restorations and, class 11, 701
composite restorations and
class 11, 556, 560
class 111, 508, 511, 514
flattening of, 321
Spoons
applications for, 314
bin-angle, 312f
triple-angle, 312f
Spores, bacterial, 375, 376
Spruing in cast metal restorations, 856
Squamous epithelium, stratified, 35
Stabilization of teeth after orthodontic
treatment, 634-635
Staged curing, 197, 202
Staining
dentinal, 100
interfacial, 206
marginal, 425
Stainless steel
for hand cutting instruments, 309
for splints, 633
matrix of, amalgam restorations and
class 11, 726
occlusolingual class 1, 694
sterilization and, 372
thermal expansion in, 138t
Stamp cusps, 38, 42, 43f, 44f
Standard operating procedures (SOPS), 352
Standards for charting systems, 402
Standards programs, 224b, 224-226
Stannous fluoride, 111t, 112
State regulations to reduce exposure risks,
350-356

Static occlusal relationships, 37-38, 418
Stationary sharpening stones, 317
techniques for, 318-322
Steam pressure sterilization, 372-373
of handpieces, 378-379
Steel
carbon, 309
hardness test of, 143t
stainless
hand cutting instruments and, 309
thermal expansion in, 138t
Steel bur, 330
Sterilization, 371-376
boiling water, 374
chemical vapor pressure, 373, 379
defined, 375
dry heat, 373-374
ethylene oxide, 374
handpiece, 378-379
HIV and, 358
instrument, 309-310, 322
cleaning before, 369t, 369-371
liquid sterilants and high-level disinfectants in, 376
monitors of, 374-376
new methods of, 374
of restorative material, 302-303
sharpening of instruments and, 321
steam pressure, 372-373
handpiece and, 378-379
types of instruments and methods of,
376
Sterilization indicators and date, 375
Sterngold 100,216t
Stiffness
of cast metal restorations, 217
of material, 141-142
Stik-Shield guard card, 437-438,
439f-440f
Stomatitis, herpetic, 357
Stones. See also Diamond stones.
die, inspection of, 847, 848f
handpiece sharpening, 318
stationary sharpening, 317
Stools, operating, 433-434
Storage of hand cutting instruments, 322
Straight chisel, 313f, 314
Straight fissure bur, 331, 332t
Straight handpiece
development of, 322
shank of, 329-330
turbine principle for, 324
Strain, 141, 143, 144f
cutting instruments and, 340
elastic, 141, 142-143
plastic, 141, 142-143
shear stress versus, 143, 144f
tooth structure and, 146, 147, 148f
Strain rate sensitivity, 142, 143
Strain relaxation, 142
Stratified squamous epithelium, 35
Streptococcus cricetus (serotype a), 67
Streptococcus ferns (serotype c), 67
Streptococcus mitis, 73, 74f, 74t, 114
Streptococcus mutans, 67. See also Mutans
streptococci.
Streptococcus rattus (serotype b), 67
Streptococcus salivarius
caries and, 73, 74f, 74t
in newborn, 76
oral habitat of, 80

Streptococcus sanguis, 73, 74f, 74t
in pits and fissures, 91
oral hygiene and, 87, 114
plaque community and, 78
secondary succession and, 77
Streptococcus sobrinus (serotypes d, g,
and h), 67
Stress, 141, 143, 144f
at resin-dentin interface, 243-244
composites and, 203, 204
shrinkage of, 203-204
contraction, 203
cutting instruments and, 340
internal, restorations reducing, 480, 766
shear, 143
tooth structure and, 146, 147f, 148f
tooth/ restoration interfaces and, 203
Stress corrosion, 144, 155, 155t
Stress relaxation, 142
Stress transfer, 146
Stress-strain curve, 142, 143
Striae of Retzius, 17-19, 70f-71f
histology of, 92-93
i ncremental, 16f, 19-20
Strips of direct-filling gold, 211, 873
Structure-selective corrosion, 144
Stub margin, 822, 829
Study casts in examination and diagnosis,
416
Styptic-treated retraction cord, 468
for class V amalgam restorations, 754, 755
Subgingival areas
deep preparations of, 571
plaque development in, 85-89
Submucosa, 36
Substrate of dentin, adhesion and, 240-243,
245
Subtransparant dentin, 99
Succession
bacterial plaque, 72-73, 74f, 74t
early stages of, 70f-71f, 77, 77t
late stages of, 77-78, 79f
ecologic, 73f, 76
primary and secondary, 76
Mutans streptococci and, 77
Sucrose
caries diagnosis and, 102
caries prevention and, 113
high frequency exposure to, 69
plaque bacteria and, 67
community structure of, 78
oral hygiene and, 87-88
Suction devices in moisture control, 444,
466-467, 468f
Sulcular brushing technique, 120
Sulcular fluid
in operating field, 444-445, 468
plaque and, 88
Sulfur, mercury reaction with, 161
Super Snap discs, 522
Supine position, 431
in adverse reactions, 443
vasodepressor syncope and, 437
Supporting cusps, 38
in occlusion, 42, 43f, 44f
Sureful composite, 202t
Surface properties, 140
composites and, 476-477, 479
esthetic procedures and, 597
roughness or smoothness in, 179,
193-194, 301

I ndex

Surface sealers, penetration coefficients for,
188t
Surface zone of incipient caries, 93f, 95
Surfactant, 214
Surfanalyzer, 193
Surgery, oral, treatment planning for, 423
Surgical blade in Bard-Parker handle
for interproximal excess in composite
finishing, 522-523, 562
in dentist prescribed-home applied
bleaching technique, 611
Surgical caps, 363
Suspension liners, 171, 172-173
Suture needle with dental floss for fixed
bridge isolation, 461, 462f
Swallowing of small objects, throat shield
for reducing, 466, 467f
Sybraloy, 149t, 157t
Symmetry in esthetic procedures, 595-596
Syncope, 437, 443
Syntac Single Component, 247
Syntac Sprint, 247
Syphilis, 394t-395t, 398-399
Syringe
air entrapment in, 520
for composite insertion, 495-496
in class Il restorations, 560-561
in class III restorations, 517-518, 519-520
in class IV restorations, 527
for gel etchant, 493f, 515f
for local anesthesia, 437, 438-441
Systemic diseases in medical review, 399
T
T cells in Peyer's patches, 112
Talc, 143t
Taper angle of bur, 334
Tarnish, 144, 154-156, 155t
Tartaric acid, 208
TB. See Tuberculosis (TB).
T4(CD4) helper lymphocytes, 356
Team, positions of, 431-434
TEGDMA diffused out of sealant, 189
Teeth
abutment
pontics and
all-porcelain, 647, 648
denture tooth, 640
porcelain fused-to-metal or allmetal, 640
removable partial denture with class 11
amalgam restorations and, 713
adjacent to prosthesis needing operative
dentistry, 271
alignment of, 38-40, 41f
caries formation and, 75
rotated
class II amalgam restorations in, 712
esthetic dentistry and, 597
anatomy of
complex amalgam restoration disadvantages and, 766, 783-785, 786f
contours of amalgam restorations and,
410
apparent size of, 594-595, 596
at risk for dental disease, 6-7
avulsed or partially avulsed, 635-636
bleaching of, 206
brushing of, 114
initial examination and, 405
technique for, 120, 121f

Teeth-cont'd
cariogenic potential of, 67
cleaning of, professional, 120-121
color gradations in, 597
light reflection and shadowing with,
594, 597, 598
light sources and, 598
matching with natural, 483
restorations and. See Tooth-colored
restorations.
contacts of
mandibular movements and, 58-61
patterns of, 38
contours of, 15, 32-33
anatomic, amalgam restorations and,
410
esthetic procedures for, 599-604, 605f
craze lines in, 412, 413f
complex amalgam restorations for, 766
decay of. See Caries.
denotation system for, 402, 403f
discoloration of. See Discoloration.
elastic bending of, 411
examination and diagnosis of, 401t,
406-416, 413b
abrasions in, 412
adjunctive aids in, 414-416
amalgam restorations in, 409-410, 411f
attrition in, 412
caries in, 401t, 406-409
cast restorations in, 410
chemical erosion in, 411, 412f
composite and other tooth-colored
restorations in, 410f, 411
electric pulp tester in, 412, 415
idiopathic erosion in, 411, 412f
nonhereditary, hypocalcified enamel
in, 411
palpation in, 415
percussion test in, 414-415
radiography in, 401t, 406f, 409f,
412-413, 413b, 414f
study casts in, 416
thermal test in, 415
flexure of, 146, 147f, 148f
clinical examination of, 411
form of
contours in. See Teeth, contours of.
function and, 32
restorations for, 271
physiology of, 32-35
fractures in, 146, 147f, 148
differential diagnosis of, 412, 413f
periodontal examination for, 417f
restorations for, 271, 278
cast metal, 801
complex amalgam, 766
group function of, 61
interfach relationships of, 40-42
interproximal surface caries progression
on, 86f
investing tissues and, 15-37
classes of, 15-16
color of, 17
dentitions in, 15
form and function of, 15-16
mandible in, 35,47f
maxilla in, 35, 47f
oral mucosa in, 35-36
periodontium in, 36-37
physiology of, 13-15, 32-35

Teeth-cont'd
investing tissues and-cont'd
sensitivity of, 26-27
structures of
cementum in, 31, 32f. See also
Cementum.
enamels in, 16-22. See also Enamel.
pulp-dentin complex in, 22-31, 97
supporting tissue mechanism of, 15
measuring distance between centers of,
450
missing, operative dentistry and, 5t, 6
mobility of
acid-etched, resin-bonded splints for,
632-636
clinical examination of, 416
nonvital
bleaching treatments for, 608-609
esthetic dentistry for discolorations
and, 607
notched area of, 532
occlusal function of. See Occlusion.
plaque in, 80-87. See also Plaque.
pH and, 90
positional defects of
esthetic dentistry and, 597
minor, 596-597
posterior. See Posterior teeth.
preparation of, for restorations. See
Tooth preparation.
space distribution of, diastema correction and, 601-604, 605f
stabilization of, orthodontic treatment
and, 634-635
stress at restoration interface with, 203
structure of
complex amalgam restorations and, 766
indirect class I and II restorations and,
572
notching of, in finishing and polishing
procedure hazards, 761, 762f
strains within, 146, 147f, 148f
thermal expansion in, 138t
veneers on, repair of, 630-631
surface texture and characterization of,
597
visibility of, when smiling, 473, 474f
vital
bleaching treatments for, 609-612
intrinsic discoloration and, 606-608
TEGDMA. See Triethylene glycol
dimethacrylate
(TEGDM/TEGDMA).
Temperature
cutting mechanisms and, 340
materials responses and, 137-138, 138t,
143
composites in, 203
resin-dentin interface in, 243-244
Tempering heat treatment for hand cutting
instruments, 309
Temporary bridge, denture tooth pontic
for, 638
Temporary restorations. See also Interim
restoration.
acrylic resin for, 476
cast metal restorations and, 837-843
direct, 838f, 841-843
disadvantages of, 802
indirect, 838-841
initial procedures with, 802-803

I ndex

Temporary restorations-cont'd
complex amalgam, 765-766, 769
direct
cast metal, 838f, 841-843
preoperative alginate impression for,
841-843
glass ionomers in, 211
indirect
cast metal, 838-841
tooth-colored restorations for class I
and II lesions and, 582
trimming and adjusting, 841
materials for, 129, 130f
removal of, 174
Temporary threshold shift, 343
Temporomandibular joints, 35, 47f
laxity in, 50
articulators and, 58
mandibular motion and, 45, 47f, 49f
damage in, 54
excessive lateral shift in, 50-51
Tensile strength, 177-179
of amalgam alloys, 156-157,157t, 654
of dentin, 26
Tension, 140
Tenure Quik with Fluoride, 248t
Terminal hinge, term of, 48
Terminal hinge closure, 54
Terminal hinge (TH) movement, 47f, 48
Termination, polymerization and, 201
Terminology
for hand instruments, 310-314
for tooth preparation combinations,
280
Tertiary dentin, 24, 25f
Test preparation in examination and
diagnosis, 415-416
Test sensitivity, 405
Test specificity, 405
Testing machines for shear-bond strength
tests, 256f, 257
Tests
diagnostic
interpretation and use of, 405-406
pain evaluation and, 418-421
in examination and diagnosis of teeth
and restorations, 414-416
Tetanus shots or boosters, splinting for
avulsed teeth and, 635
Tetracycline, teeth staining and, 598, 606,
607f, 612
veneers for, 615f, 617, 619, 620f
Texture, surface
composites and, 476-477, 479
esthetic procedures and, 597
TGDMA. See Triethylene glycol
dimethacrylate
(TEGDM/TEGDMA).
TH movement. See Terminal hinge (TH)
movement.
T-helper lymphocytes, 356
Therapeutic dose of drug, 434
Thermal changes. See Temperature.
Thermal conductivity, 138
of amalgam alloys, 654
Thermal diffusivity, 138
Thermal expansion, 137, 138t
linear coefficient of. See Linear coefficient of thermal expansion
(LCTE).

Thermal insulation of dental pulp, 173
Thermal test
in examination and diagnosis, 415
in pain evaluation, 418
Thermocatalytic technique for bleaching,
608-609
Thiokol rubber impression material, 213,
213t
Third National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey, 6
caries prevalence and, 65-66, 101
pit-and-fissure sealants and, 121
Third-generation adhesives, 244-245, 248b
Third-world countries dental health, 68
Thixotropic gels, 492
Thread Mate System (TMS), 771, 772t, 777t,
778-780
bending tool for, 782
hand wrench for, 778-780
sizes of, 773
3-o'clock position, 432
Threshold dose, 75
Threshold level for toxicity, 145
Throat shields, 466, 467f
Ti systems. See Titanium (Ti) systems.
Time-dependent responses to stress or
strain, 142
Tin-mercury (SnHg) amalgam alloy
copper reaction with, 654
corrosion in, 156
reaction product crystals of, 153, 154f
reaction product phases of, 153
scanning electron microscopy of, 153,
154f
Tinner's joint, 558
Tissue retraction in final impression,
843-845
Titanium (Ti) systems, 215
TMS. See Thread Mate System (TMS).
Tobacco stains, 606f
Tofflemire retainers, 494
amalgam restorations and
class I, occlusolingual, 694, 695
class II, 718-726
class V, 760
complex, 787, 790f, 791f, 792f-793f,
794f-795f
matrix removal in, 793
in class II composite restorations,
558-560
Togavirus, 394t-395t
Tomes fibers, 22, 22f, 95
Tomes processes, 17
Tongue
oral habitat and, 80
precautions for, cutting instruments and,
342-343
Tongue blade wedge, 725
Tooth preparation, 269-306
abbreviated descriptions of, 279
amalgam restoration, 303, 654-655,
658-664
class I, 672-679, 680f, 681f
extensive, 687-688, 689f
final, 677-679, 680f, 681f
initial, 672-677
occlusolingual, 690-694
class 11, 660-661, 697-717. See also Class
II amalgam restoration, tooth
preparation for.

Tooth preparation-cont'd
amalgam restoration-cont'd
class III, 745-752
distal surface of maxillary canine
and, 745-751, 752f
final, 748-752, 753f
initial, 745-748
mandibular incisor and, 751-752
class V, 755-758, 759f
class Vl, 736
complex, 765f, 769-787, 772t, 777t
final, 770-771
foundations in, 786-787
initial, 769-770
pin-retained restorations in, 769-785,
772t, 777t. See also Pin-retained
amalgam restorations.
slot-retained restorations in, 768f,
785-786. See also Slot-retained
complex amalgam restorations.
conventional, 664f
foundation, 786-787
preoperative visualization of extensions of, 658, 659f
principles of, 659-664
cavosurface margin in, 661-662
convenience form in, 663
final preparation, 664
initial depth in, 659, 660f
outline form in, 659-661
preparation designs in, 664
primary resistance form in, 662-663
primary retention form in, 661-662
removal of remaining fault and
pulp protection in, 663
requirements in, 659
secondary resistance and retention
form in, 663-664
smoothness or roughness of, 301
two or more phases in, 712, 713f
angles of, 275f, 280, 282f
final, 300
primary resistance form and, 290,
291
Black's principles of, modifications of,
271-272
CAD/CAM milled restoration, 582,
583f
cast metal restoration, 274, 803-837
inlay, 803-826, 827f. See also Cast metal
restorations, inlay.
onlay, 826-837. See also Cast metal
restorations, onlay.
complex, 279, 282f
composite restoration, 303-304, 486-492
beveled conventional, 489-490, 491f.
See also specific restoration
class.
box-only, 490-491. See also specific
restoration class.
class 1, 544-548
boxlike, 544, 545
combination of conventional with
beveled conventional, 547, 548f
modified, 547-548, 549f
class 11, 551-558
beveled conventional, 553-554
box-only, 557, 558f
conventional, 551-557
modified, 557-558

I ndex

Tooth preparation-cont'd
composite restoration-cont'd
class III, 504-514
beveled conventional, 506-514
conventional, 505-506
modified, 512-514, 525-526
class IV, 523-526
beveled conventional, 510f, 524-525
modified, 513f, 525-526
class V, 528-533
aberrant smooth surface pit fault
and, 532-533
abrasion/ erosion lesions and,
531-532
beveled conventional, 510f, 514f,
529-530, 531f
conventional, 528-529
modified, 513f, 525-526, 531
conventional, 476-477, 488-489. See also
specific restoration class.
different designs of, 488-492
facial/lingual slot preparations in,
491-492,557-558
gingival extension and, 485-486, 487f
modified, 490-491. See also specific
restoration class.
preparation design in, 488-492
pulpal protection and, 492
compound, 279, 282f
definition of, 271
exploratory, treatment planning and,
542-543
factors affecting, 273-274, 305t
final stage of, 273, 294-303. See also specific restoration class.
cleaning, inspecting, and sealing in,
301-303
finishing external walls of preparation
in, 299-301
pulp protection in, 295-298
removal of infected dentin or old
restorative material in, 294-295
resistance or retention form in,
298-299
smoothness or roughness of, 301
glass-ionomer restoration, 529f, 531f,
532f, 535
gold restoration, 877-878
class I, 878-879
history of changes in, 237
indirect tooth-colored restoration for
class I and II lesions and,
579-581
initial, 272-273, 284, 285-294. See also specific restoration type.
convenience form in, 293-294
depth of, 286-290
enameloplasty in, 287f, 289-290
outline form and initial depth in,
286-290
pit-and-fissure lesions in, 286-288
primary resistance form in, 290-292
primary retention form in, 292-293
proximal surface, 288-289
smooth-surface lesions and, 275f,
288
instruments and equipment for. See Instruments and equipment.
mesial and occlusal surface, 279, 282f
need for restoration and, 271

Tooth preparation-cont'd
nomenclature of, 274-283
caries terminology in, 274-278
classification of tooth preparations in,
281-283, 284f, 285f
noncarious tooth defects terminology
in, 278-279
tooth preparation terminology in, 279281
objectives of, 271-272
occlusal, 279, 282f
porcelain fused-to-metal or all-metal
pontics and, 640, 643, 645-646
pulpal protection in, 171-172
second state of, 294-303. See also Tooth
preparation, final stage of.
simple, 279, 282f
stages and steps of, 272-273. See also specific restoration type.
stress transfer and, 146
terminology of, 2
two-surface, inlays in maxillary first premolars and, 803, 804f
walls of, 279-280, 282f. See also specific
walls.
amalgam restoration
class I, 677-679, 680f, 681f
class II, 702
composite restoration
class 111, 505, 506, 507, 509f
class IV, 525
class V, 529
dentinal, 275f, 280
enamel, 275f, 280
placement of etchant, primary, or adhesive on, 298-299
Tooth Slooth, 420
Toothbrush, wear from, 205
Tooth-colored restorations
clinical examination of, 410f, 411
composites for. See Composite restorations; specific restoration class.
examination and diagnosis of teeth and,
410f
glass ionomers for. See Glass ionomers.
i mproved physical properties of, indirect
restorations and, 571-572
in treatment planning, 425, 426
indications for, 425, 426
indirect, 569-590. See also Indirect
restorations, tooth-colored, classes
I and II.
Tooth-to-tooth relationship, 40
Tooth-to-two-tooth contact, 40
Topaz, 143t
Topical anesthetic, 441
Topical fluoride, 532
Torsion, 141
Total-etch dentin adhesive systems, 246f,
247, 248, 248b
Toughness, 142
Towel and towelpack sterilization, 372
Toxicity
dental material, 144-145
microleakage and, 254
heavy metal, management and, 165-168
mercury, 158-160
Toxicologic screening, 145
Traditional amalgam alloys, 149-150
Traditional cement, 138t. See also Cement.

Traditional composites, 195
Training
hazard communications and, 226-227
on bloodborne pathogens, OSHArequired, 356-358
responsibilities for, 228
Transillumination
fiber-optic, 408
in pain evaluation, 418
Translation, 47f, 48
Translite Auto Matrix System, 560
Translucency, 140, 598-599
Translucent filling materials, 475
Translucent zones of incipient carious
lesion in enamel, 92f, 93t, 94-95
Transmission, 139
of pain, 258
Transparent dentin, 98, 99
Transporting
of impressions and registrations, 379-382
of instruments, 370
Transverse terminology, 281
Traumatic defects, modified class IV
restoration for, 525-526
Treatment planning, 421-426
approval of, 426
cast metal restorations and, 426
charting and records for, 404f
complex amalgam restorations in, 765
composite restorations and, 540-541
general considerations for, 421-422
indications for operative, 423-426
interdisciplinary considerations in,
422-423
sequencing of, 422, 422b
tooth preparation for restorations and,
273
Treponema pallidum, 394t-395t, 398-399
Triangular cusp ridge, 42, 43f
Triangular ridge, 42, 43f
Triangular wedge, 723, 724f
Tricyclic antidepressants, 399
Tridymite, 192
Triethylene glycol dimethacrylate
(TEGDM/TEGDMA), 244t
history of, 191
in sealants, 188
monomer diluents and, 195
unreacted monomer in light-curing and,
201
Triple-angle shank angle, 310
Triple-angle spoon, 312f
Trituration, 149-150
amalgam, 665
class I restorations and, 681-682, 683f
glass-ionomer restorations and, 535
mercury exposure during, 160-161
True negatives, 405
True positives, 405
Try-in
for casting for cast metal restoration,
858-866
after preparation of mouth, 858-860
before removing casting, 866
with adjusting proximal contacts,
860-862,866f
with improving marginal adaptation,
863-866
with occlusing of cast, 862-863
with seating of casting, 860-862, 866f

I ndex

Try-in-cont'd
for indirect processed composite
veneers, 623-624
for indirect tooth-colored restorations for
class I and 11 lesions, 583-584, 585f
for mandibular posterior bridge with
metal and porcelain pontic, 646
for porcelain fused-to-metal resinbonded bridges, 643
T4/T8 lymphocyte ratios, 357
Tubercles, 398
Tuberculin testing, 361, 378, 398
Tuberculosis (TB), 394t-395t
airborne contamination with, 348
epidemiology of, 361
history of, 398
in AIDS patients, 358
multidrug-resistant, 361
Tufts, enamel, 19, 20f
Tungsten carbide
hardness test of, 143t
in burs, 323, 323t
Tunnel tooth preparation, 303, 304, 664f
Turbid dentin, 99
Turbine contamination control, 376-377, 379
Turbine handpiece, noise levels of, 343
Turb-Jet portable unit, 324f
12-o'clock position, 432
Twisted orthodontic wire in splinting for
avulsed teeth, 635
Two-surface preparation for maxillary premolar inlays, 803, 804f
Type A hepatitis, 359, 360
Type B hepatitis, 359-360
Type C hepatitis, 359-360
Type D hepatitis, 359
Type E hepatitis, 359
Tytin
composition and classification of, 149t
fatigue curve for, 143
mechanical properties of, 157t
reaction product matrix and, 153f
U
UDM matrix composition, 194
UDMA. See Urethane dimethacrylate
(UDMA).
Ulcers, aphthous, 398
Ultimate strength, 141, 142f
Ultraconservative composite restorations,
277, 542-543
Ultrasonic cleaners, 369, 370-371
Ultrathin metal matrix band, 558
Ultraviolet lasers, 325t, 326, 327, 327t
Ultraviolet light sterilization disadvantages, 374
Ultraviolet light-curing system (UL), 197
Undercarving in class I amalgam restorations, 684
Undercuts
prepared form for, amalgam restorations
and, 659
retention
class IV restoration tooth preparation
and, 524, 525
denture tooth pontic and, 639
gold restoration tooth preparation
and, 878f, 879
Unfilled acrylics, 191
U.S. EPA. See Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA).

U.S. Government Printing Office, 351
U.S. Postal Service specifications for packaging and labeling of
contaminated materials, 380
U.S. Public Health Service
criteria for pit-and-fissure caries diagnosis, 104-105
recommendations of, for exposure-prone
health care personnel, 355-356
Universal adhesive system, 259
Universal infection control measures, 402
Universal matrix placement, amalgam
restoration
class II, 718-726
complex, 787, 790f, 791f, 792f-793f,
794f-795f
Universal precautions, 228
Universal system for tooth denotation, 402,
403f
Urethane dimethacrylate (UDMA), 541
as primary monomer for matrix
monomer, 197
history of use of, 191
Urgent phase in treatment planning, 422
UV light-curing system. See Ultraviolet
light-curing system (UL).
V
Vaccine
anticaries, 9, 112
hepatitis types A and B, 350, 360, 396
measles, 361
varicella, 393
Valacyclovir
in chickenpox, 393, 395t
in herpes simplex virus infection, 392,
395t
Valiant, 149t
Valiant PhD, 149t
Value, 139
Valvular heart disease from phentermine
or fenfluramine, 399
Vancomycin, 113t
VAOTA vaccine, 360
Vapors
hazardous, 228
precautions for, 343-344
Varicella, 393, 394t-395t, Plate 9-1
Varicella vaccine, 393
Varicella-zoster virus (VZV), 393, 394t-395t
Varney foot condensers for direct gold, 897
Varnishes, 171, 172, 173f, 174t
dentin and, 220
fluoride, pit-and-fissure sealants with, 190
in pulpal protection in final tooth preparation, 296, 297
survival of, 177
Vasoconstrictors, 434-435
for retraction cord in final impression
tissue retraction, 843
Vasodepressor syncope, 437
Veillonella species, 73f, 74f, 74t
Velvalloy, 157t
Veneers, 615-632
direct, 615, 617-620
full, 618-620
partial, 593f, 617-618
repair of, 630-632
etched porcelain, 624-627, 628f
faulty, metal restorations and, 631-632
for existing metal restorations, 628-630

full, 615, 618f, 620f, 622f, 624f, 626f
direct, 618-620
in conservative esthetic procedure for
maxillary anterior teeth, 593f
in full-coverage facial restorations, 594
indirect, 615-616
repair of, 630-632
techniques for, 620-627, 628f, 629f
try-in of, 623
intraenamel preparation for, 616
metal restorations and, 628-632
partial, 593f, 615, 616f
direct, 617-618
porcelain, 620, 621, 624-627, 628f
anterior teeth and, 474, 475f
preparation designs for, 616-617, 628f
pressed ceramic, 621, 627, 629f
processed composite, 620, 621-624
repair of, 630-632
tooth structure, repair of, 630-631
Venereal warts, 393, Plate 9-1
Vertical, terminology and, 766
Vertical bitewing radiographs, 417
Vertical dimension, mastication and, 16,
16f
Vertical overlap, 40, 41f
occlusion and, 418
Vertical terminology, 281
Vestibule, reflective mucosa of, 36
Vidarabine, 395t
Vinyl polysiloxane impression material
classification of, 213, 213t
procedures for handling and transporting, 380-381
setting shrinkage of, 213, 214f
Viral hepatitis. See Hepatitis.
Viral protease inhibitors, 396
Virus shedding in rubeola, 393
Viscosity, 143
composites and, 195-196
of pit-and-fissure sealants, 188
Visible light-cured (VLC) system, 187-188,
197
Visible wavelengths, 325, 327
Visits. See also Appointments.
operative dentistry and, 8
types of, 389
Vita Mark 11, 223t
VITA shade guides, 484
Vita VMK 68,575t
Vital bleaching treatments, 609-612
Vital pulp, tooth fracture and, 278, 412f. See
also Pulp protection.
Vital teeth
bleaching treatments for, 609-612
intrinsic discoloration and, 606-608
Vitremer, 209t
VLC DYCAL liners, 175t
VLC system. See Visible light-cured (VLC)
system.
Voids, marginal
amalgam restorations and, 410, 667
treatment planning for, 425
composite restorations and, 497, 498
Voluntary standards, 224
composite restorations and
class V, 531-532
contraindication to, 503
classes I and 11 lesions and, 539
significance of, 499
VZV See Varicella-zoster virus (VZV).

I ndex

W
Wafers, cellulose, 465-466
Walking bleach, 608-609
Walls of tooth preparation. See Tooth
preparation, walls of.
Warts, venereal, 393, Plate 9-1
Washing of hands, rules for, 352, 353f
Waste disposal
amalgam restorations and, 165-168, 653
needle and cartridge, 443
OSHA Rule on Bloodborne Pathogens
for, 352-354
regulations for, 364
responsibilities for, 228
Water
absorption of
composites and, 204, 479
resin-dentin interface, 243
chemical setting of liners and, 173-174
fluoridation of, 110-112
Water retraction system
correction of, 377
testing device for, 377
Water spray, high-volume evacuator used
with, 466-467
Water system contamination, 376-378
Water-soluble lubricant for rubber dam, 449
Wavelength, laser, 325f, 325-327
Wax
direct gold and, 874
inlay, rubbing, 718
temporary restorations before cast metal
restorations and, 802
thermal expansion in, 138t
Wax interocclusal record for verifying cusp
reduction, 824, 825f
Wax patterns, 853-856
finishing, 855-856, 857f
initially withdrawing and reseating, 856,
858f
occlusal surface in, 854-855
on sprue base in hot pressed glass
ceramic restorations, 577f
pattern base for, 853
proximal contour and contact in, 853-854
Wax-up, occlusal, 854-855
Wear resistance
cast metal restoration and, 802
composites and, 204, 206, 207f
factors affecting, 479, 482, 499
microfill, 477
indirect restorations and
ceramic materials for, 573
class I and 11, 572
laboratory-processed, 573
light-curing procedure and, 201
machined restorations and, 222
Wedelstaedt chisel, 312, 313f, 314
gold restorations and
class III, 892, 893f, 895f
class V, 887f

Wedges, 457
amalgam restorations and, 658
class 11, 701, 721-723
composite restorations and, 485, 494,
495f
class 1I, 551, 556, 559f, 560
class 111, 510, 515, 516, 517f
Welding in direct gold compaction, 876
Western Blot test, 357
Wet-bonding technique, 251-254
Wetting
appearance and, 140
dental adhesion and, 140, 179, 180
pit-and-fissure sealants and, 188
viscous luting cements and, 186-187
Wetting agents for impression materials,
214
Wheel bur, 332t
S.S. White Dental Manufacturing
Company burs, 331
White line around enamel margin,
497
White paper sheets for operatory
surfaces, 365
White spots, 93, 276
clinical examination for, 407f, 408
esthetic dentistry for discolored teeth
and, 606, 613
veneers and, 617f, 618
high caries index and, 743
radiographic translucencies and, 406f
Whitlow, herpetic, 392-393, Plate 9-1
Width of tooth, apparent, 594, 595f
Width-to-length ratio of incisors, ideal,
596
Window preparation for veneer,
616-617
in direct technique, 619
in indirect technique, 622, 627, 628f
Winged or wingless retainer, 447-448
Wire splints
in orthodontic treatments, 634-635
for avulsed teeth, 635
in strengthening, 633
Work practice controls, term of, 352
Working casts and dies, 846-852
completing, 847-851, 852f
interocclusal records and, 851-852
pouring final impression and, 847
Working contacts, marking of, 862
Working mandibular pathways, 50,54
Working side of jaw, 60
Wrap-around design of mandibular posterior bridge, 645
X
Xerostomia
caries prevention and, 112-113
in medical review of older adults, 400
plaque formation and, 89
Xylitol gums, 121

Y
Y. See Yttrium (Y).

Yellowed teeth, 606-607, 609
Yield point, 141, 142
Young adults. See also Age.
all-porcelain pontics for, 647
color of teeth and, 598
Young rubber dam frame, 446f, 447f
neck strap for, 447f, 455
Young's modulus, 141-142. See also Elastic
modulus.
dentin and, 250, 257
Yttrium (Y), 192
Z
Zamamivir, 393
Zidovudine, 356-357
Zinc (Zn)
in amalgam alloys, 148-149, 149t, 152
in composites, 192
in gold casting alloys, 215t, 216, 216t
Zinc oxide in liners, 296. See also Liners
and bases.
Zinc oxide-eugenol (ZOE) cement,
217-219, 218t, 219t
germicidal or protective effect of, 302
in pulpal protection in final tooth preparation, 296
resin-modified, 217-219, 21St, 219t
liners with, 171f, 174, 175, 175t
retention of, 219
Zinc oxide-eugenol (ZOE) impression
material, 213, 213t
Zinc phosphate cement, 174, 218
composition, structure, and properties
of, 176t
dentin and, 220
in cast metal restorations, 260
in pulpal protection in final tooth preparation, 296, 297
retention of, 219
Zinc silicophosphate cements, 217-219,
218t
Zinc-free amalgam, oxidation in, 152
Zirconium silicate grit, 523
Zirconium (Zr)
in composites, 192
in finishing strip, 523
machined restorations and, 222
Zn. See Zinc (Zn).
ZOE cement. See Zinc oxide-eugenol
(ZOE) cement.
ZOE impression material. See Zinc oxideeugenol (ZOE) impression
material.
Zr. See Zirconium (Zr).

